14 Rediscovering the Organism
Having devoted most of this book to playing down the importance of the individual organism, and to building up an alternative image of a turmoil of selfish replicators, battling for their own survival at the expense of their alleles, reaching unimpeded through individual body walls as though those walls were transparent, interacting with the world and with each other without regard to organismal boundaries, we now hesitate. There really is something pretty impressive about individual organisms. If we actually could wear spectacles that made bodies transparent and displayed only DNA, the distribution of DNA that we would see in the world would be overwhelmingly non-random. If cell nuclei glowed like stars and all else was invisible, multicellular bodies would show up as close-packed galaxies with cavernous space between them. A million billion glowing pinpricks move in unison with each other and out of step with all the members of other such galaxies.
The organism is a physically discrete machine, usually walled off from other such machines. It has an internal organization, often of staggering complexity, and it displays to a high degree the quality that Julian Huxley (1912) labelled 'individuality'—literally indivisibility—the quality of being sufficiently heterogeneous in form to be rendered non-functional if cut in half. Genetically speaking, too, the individual organism is usually a clearly definable unit, whose cells have the same genes as each other but different genes from the cells of other organisms. To an immunologist the individual organism has a special kind of 'uniqueness' (Medawar 1957), in that it will readily accept grafts from other parts of its own body, but not from other bodies. To the ethologist—and this is really an aspect of Huxley's indivisibility—the organism is a unit of behavioural action in a much stronger sense than, say, two organisms, or a limb of an organism. The organism has one coordinated central nervous system. It takes 'decisions' (Dawkins & Dawkins 1973) as a unit. All its limbs conspire harmoniously together to achieve one end at a time. On those occasions when two or more organisms try to coordinate their efforts, say when a pride of lions cooperatively stalks prey, the feats of coordination among individuals are feeble compared with the intricate orchestration, with high spatial and temporal precision, of the hundreds of muscles within each individual. Even a starfish, whose tube-feet enjoy a measure of autonomy and may tear the animal in two if the circum-oral nerve ring has been surgically cut, looks like a single entity, and in nature behaves as if it had a single purpose.
I am grateful to Dr J. P. Hailman for not withholding from me the sarcastic reaction of a colleague to the paper that was a brief trial-run for this book (Dawkins 1978a): 'Richard Dawkins has rediscovered the organism.' The irony was not lost on me, but there are wheels within wheels. We agree that there is something special about the individual organism as a level in the hierarchy of life, but it is not something obvious, to be accepted without question. My hope is that this book has revealed that there is a second side to the Necker Cube. But Necker Cubes have a habit of flipping back again to their original orientation, and then continuing to alternate. Whatever it is that is special about the individual organism as a unit of life, we should at least see it more clearly for having viewed the other side of the Necker Cube, for having trained our eyes to see through body walls into the world of replicators, and out and beyond to their extended phenotypes.
So, what is it that is special about the individual organism? Given that life can be viewed as consisting of replicators with their extended phenotypic tools of survival, why in practice have replicators chosen to group themselves together by the hundreds of thousands in cells, and why have they influenced those cells to clone themselves by the millions of billions in organisms?
One kind of answer is suggested by the logic of complex systems. Simon (1962) has written a stimulating essay on 'The architecture of complexity', which suggests (using a parable of two watchmakers called Tempus and Hora, which has become well known), a general functional reason why complex organization of any kind, biological or artificial, tends to be organized into nested hierarchies of repeated subunits. I have developed his argument in the ethological context, concluding that the evolution of statistically 'improbable assemblies proceeds more rapidly if there is a succession of intermediate stable sub-assemblies. Since the argument can be applied to each sub-assembly, it follows that highly complex systems which exist in the world are likely to have a hierarchical architecture' (Dawkins 1976b). In the present context the hierarchy consists of genes within cells and cells within organisms. Margulis (1981) makes a persuasive and fascinating case for an old idea that the hierarchy contains yet another intermediate level: eukaryotic 'cells' are themselves, in a sense, multi-cellular clusters, symbiotic unions of entities such as mitochondria, plastids and cilia, which are homologous to, and descended from, prokaryotic cells. I will not pursue the matter further here. Simon's point is a very general one, and we need a more specific answer to the question of why replicators chose to organize their phenotypes into functional units, especially at the two levels of the cell and the multicellular organism.
In order to ask questions about why the world is the way it is, we have to imagine how it might have been. We invent possible worlds in which life might have been organized differently, and ask what would have happened if it had been. What instructive alternatives to the way life is, then, can we imagine? First, in order to see why replicating molecules ganged up in cells, we imagine a world in which there are replicating molecules floating freely in the sea. There are different varieties of replicator, and they are competing with each other for space and for the chemical resources needed to build copies of themselves, but they are not grouped together in chromosomes or nuclei. Each solitary replicator exerts phenotypic power to make copies of itself, and selection favours those with the most effective phenotypic power. It is easy to believe that this form of life would not be evolutionarily stable. It would be invaded by mutant replicators that 'gang up'. Certain replicators would have chemical effects that complement those of other replicators, complement them in the sense that when the two chemical effects are put together replication of both is facilitated (Model 2 in the previous chapter). I have already used the example of genes coding for enzymes that catalyse successive stages of a biochemical chain reaction. The same principle may be applied to larger groups of mutually complementary replicating molecules Indeed, earthly biochemistry suggests that the minimal unit of replication, except possibly in the food-rich environment of a total parasite, is about fifty cistrons (Margulis 1981). It makes no difference to the argument whether new genes arise by duplication of old ones and remain close together, or whether previously independent genes positively come together. We can still discuss the evolutionary stability of the state of being 'ganged up'.
Ganging up of genes together into cells, then, is easily understood, but why did cells gang together into multicellular clones? In this case it might be thought that we do not have to invent thought experiments, because unicellular, or acellular, organisms abound on our world. These, however, are all small, and it may be useful to imagine a possible world in which there exist large and complex unicellular or mononucleate organisms. Could there be a form of life in which one single set of genes, enthroned in a single central nucleus, directed the biochemistry of a macroscopic body with complex organs, either a single gigantic 'cell', or a multicellular body in which all but one of the cells lacked their own private copies of the genome? I think such a form of life could only exist if its embryology followed principles very different from those with which we are familiar. In the embryologies that we know, only a minority of genes are 'turned on' in any one type of differentiating tissue at any one time (Gurdon 1974). It is admittedly a weak argument at this stage, but if there were only one set of genes in the entire body, it is not easy to see how the appropriate gene products could be conveyed to the various parts of the differentiating body at the appropriate times.
But why does there have to be a complete set of genes in every cell of a developing body? It is surely easy to imagine a form of life in which parts of the genome are hived off during differentiation, so that a given type of tissue, liver tissue or kidney tissue say, has only the genes that it needs. Only the germ-line cells, it would seem, really need to preserve the entire genome. It may be that the reason is simply that there is no easy way, physically, to hive off parts of the genome. It is not, after all, as though the genes needed in any particular differentiated region of the developing body are all segregated on one chromosome. We could, I suppose, now ask ourselves why this had to be the case. Given that it is the case, full division of the entire genome at every cell division may simply be the easiest and most economical way of doing things. However, in the light of my parable (Chapter 9) of the rosy-spectacled Martian and the need for cynicism, the reader may be tempted to speculate further. Could it be that the total, rather than partial, duplication of the genome in mitosis is an adaptation by some genes to keep themselves in a position to oversee and thwart would-be outlaws among their colleagues? Personally I doubt it, not because the idea is inherently farfetched but because it is hard to see how a gene in the liver, say, could stand to gain from being an outlaw and manipulating the liver in a way that would be to the detriment of genes in the kidney or the spleen. Following the logic of the chapter on parasites, the interests of 'liver genes' and 'kidney genes' would overlap because they share the same germ-line and the same gametic route out of the present body.
I have not provided a rigorous definition of the organism. It is, indeed, arguable that the organism is a concept of dubious utility, precisely because it is so difficult to define satisfactorily. From the immunological or genetic points of view, a pair of monozygotic twins would have to count as a single organism, yet clearly they would not so qualify from the point of view of the physiologist, the ethologist, or Huxley's indivisibility criterion. What is 'the individual' in a colonial siphonophore or bryozoan? Botanists have good reason to be less fond of the phrase 'individual organism' than zoologists are: 'The individual fruit fly, flour beetle, rabbit, flatworm or elephant is a population at the cellular but not at any higher level. Starvation does not change the number of legs, hearts or livers of an animal but the effect of stress on a plant is to alter both the rate of formation of new leaves and the rate of death of old ones: a plant may react to stress by varying the number of its parts' (Harper 1977, pp. 20–21). To Harper, as a plant population biologist, the leaf may be a more salient 'individual' than 'the plant', since the plant is a straggling, vague entity for whom reproduction may be hard to distinguish from what a zoologist would happily call 'growth'. Harper feels obliged to coin two new terms for different kinds of 'individual' in botany. 'The "ramet" is the unit of clonal growth, the module that may often follow an independent existence if severed from the parent plant.' Sometimes, as in strawberries, the ramet is the unit that we ordinarily call a 'plant'. In other cases such as white clover the ramet may be the single leaf. The 'genet', on the other hand, is the unit which springs from one single-celled zygote, the 'individual' in the sense of a zoologist whose animals reproduce sexually.
Janzen (1977) faces up to the same difficulty, suggesting that a clone of dandelions should be regarded as one 'evolutionary individual' (Harper's genet), equivalent to a single tree although spread out along the ground rather than raised up in the air on a trunk, and although divided up into separate physical 'plants' (Harper's ramets). According to this view, there may be as few as four individual dandelions competing with each other for the territory of the whole of North America. Janzen sees a clone of aphids in the same way. His paper has no literature citations at all, but the view is not a new one. It goes back at least as far as 1854, when T. H. Huxley 'treated each life cycle as an individual, with all the products from sexual event to sexual event being a single unit. He even treated an asexual lineage of aphids as an individual' (Ghiselin 1981). There is merit in this way of thinking, but I shall show that it leaves out something important.
One way to re-express the Huxley/Janzen argument is as follows. The germ-line of a typical organism, say a human, goes through a sequence of perhaps a few dozen mitotic divisions between each meiosis. Employing Chapter 5's 'backwards' way of looking at the 'past experience of a gene', any given gene in a living human has a history of cell divisions as follows: meiosis mitosis mitosis … mitosis meiosis. In every successive body, in parallel with the mitotic division of the germ-line, other mitotic divisions have furnished the germ-line with a large clone of 'helper' cells, grouped together into a body in which the germ-line is housed. In every generation the germ-line is funnelled down into a one-celled 'bottleneck' (a gamete followed by a zygote), then it fans out into a many-celled body, then it is funnelled down into a new bottleneck, etc. (Bonner 1974).
The many-celled body is a machine for the production of single-celled propagules. Large bodies, like elephants, are best seen as heavy plant and machinery, a temporary resource drain, invested in so as to improve later propagule production (Southwood 1976). In a sense the germ-line would 'like' to reduce capital investment in heavy machinery, reduce the number of cell divisions in the growth part of the cycle, so as to reduce the interval between recurrence of the reproduction part of the cycle. But this recurrence interval has an optimal length which is different for different ways of life. Genes that caused elephants to reproduce when too young and small would propagate themselves less efficiently than alleles tending to produce an optimal recurrence interval. The optimal recurrence interval for genes that happen to find themselves in elephant gene-pools is much longer than the optimal recurrence interval for genes in mouse gene-pools. In the elephant case, more capital investment is required to be laid down before returns on investment are sought. A protozoan largely dispenses with the growth phase of the cycle altogether, and its cell divisions are all 'reproductive' cell divisions.
It follows from this way of looking at organisms that the end product, the 'goal' of the growth phase of the cycle, is reproduction. The mitotic cell divisions which put together an elephant are all directed to the end of finally propagating viable gametes which succeed in perpetuating the germ-line. Now, holding this in mind, look at aphids. During the summer, asexual females go through repeated generations of asexual reproduction culminating in a single sexual generation which restarts the cycle. Clearly, by analogy with the elephant, it is easy to follow Janzen in seeing the summer asexual generations as all directed towards the final end of sexual reproduction in autumn. Asexual reproduction, according to this view, is not really reproduction at all. It is growth, just like the growth of a single elephant's body. For Janzen the whole clone of female aphids is a single evolutionary individual because it is the product of a single sexual fusion. It is an unusual individual in that it happens to be split up into a number of physically separate units, but so what? Each of those physical units contains its own fragment of germ-line, but then so does the left ovary and the right ovary of a female elephant. The fragments of germ-line in the aphid case are separated by thin air, while the two ovaries of an elephant are separated by guts but, again, so what?
Persuasive as this line of argument is, I have already mentioned that I think it misses an important point. It is right to regard most mitotic cell divisions as 'growth', 'aimed' at the final goal of reproduction, and it is right to regard the individual organism as the product of one reproductive event, but Janzen is wrong to equate the reproduction/growth distinction with the sexual/asexual distinction. There is, to be sure, an important distinction lurking here, but it is not the distinction between sex and non-sex, nor is it the distinction between meiosis and mitosis.
The distinction that I wish to emphasize is that between germ-line cell division (reproduction), and somatic or 'dead-end' cell division (growth). A germ-line cell division is one where the genes being duplicated have a chance of being the ancestors of an indefinitely long line of descendants, where the genes are, in fact, true germ-line replicators in the sense of Chapter 5. A germ-line cell division may be a mitosis or a meiosis. If we simply look at a cell division under a microscope, there may be no way of telling whether it is a germ-line division or not. Both germ-line and somatic cell divisions may be mitoses of identical appearance.
If we look at a gene in any cell in a living organism and trace its history backwards in evolutionary time, the most recent few cell divisions of its 'experience' may be somatic, but once we reach a germ-line cell division in our backwards march, all previous ones in the gene's history must be germ-line divisions. Germ-line cell divisions may be thought of as proceeding forwards in evolutionary time, while somatic cell divisions are proceeding sideways. Somatic cell divisions are used to make mortal tissues, organs and instruments whose 'purpose' is the promoting of germ-line cell divisions. The world is populated by genes which have survived in germ-lines as a consequence of aid that they received from their exact duplicates in somatic cells. Growth comes about through the propagation of dead-end somatic cells, while reproduction is the means of the propagation of germ-line cells.
Harper (1977) makes a distinction between reproduction and growth in plants, which will normally amount to the same as my distinction between germ-line and somatic cell division: 'The distinction made here between "reproduction" and "growth" is that reproduction involves the formation of a new individual from a single cell: this is usually (though not always e.g. apomicts) a zygote. In this process a new individual is "reproduced" by the information that is coded in the cell. Growth, in contrast, results from the development of organized meristems' (Harper 1977, p. 27 fn.). What matters here is whether there really is an important biological distinction between growth and reproduction which is not the same as the distinction between mitosis and meiosis + sex. Is there really a crucial difference between 'reproducing' to make two aphids on the one hand, and 'growing' to make one aphid twice as large on the other? Janzen would presumably say no. Harper would presumably say yes. I agree with Harper, but I would not have been able to justify my position until I had read J. T. Bonner's (1974) inspiring book On Development. The justification is best made with the aid of thought experiments.
Imagine a primitive plant consisting of a flat, pad-like thallus, floating on the surface of the sea, absorbing nutrients through its lower surface and sunlight through its upper surface. Instead of 'reproducing' (i.e. sending off single-celled propagules to grow elsewhere), it simply grows at its margins, spreading into an ever larger circular green carpet, like a monstrous lily pad several miles across and still growing. Maybe older parts of the thallus eventually die, so that it consists of an expanding ring rather than a filled circle like a true lily pad. Perhaps also, from time to time, chunks of the thallus split off, like icefloes shearing away from the pack ice, and separate chunks drift to different parts of the ocean. Even if we assume this kind of fission, I shall show that it is not reproduction in an interesting sense.
Now consider a similar kind of plant which differs in one crucial respect. It stops growing when it attains a diameter of 1 foot, and reproduces instead. It manufactures single-celled propagules, either sexually or asexually, and sheds them into the air where they may be carried a long way on the wind. When one of these propagules lands on the water surface it becomes a new thallus, which grows until it is 1 foot wide, then reproduces again. I shall call the two species G (for growth) and R (for reproduction) respectively.
Following the logic of Janzen's paper, we should see a crucial difference between the two species only if the 'reproduction' of the second species, R, is sexual. If it is asexual, the propagules shed into the air being mitotic products genetically identical to the cells of the parent thallus, there is, for Janzen, no important difference between the two species. The separate 'individuals' in R are no more genetically distinct than different regions of the thallus in G might be. In either species, mutation can initiate new clones of cells. There is no particular reason why, in R, mutations should occur during propagule formation any more than during thallus growth. R is simply a more fragmented version of G, just as a clone of dandelions is like a fragmented tree. My purpose in making the thought experiment, however, was to disclose an important difference between the two hypothetical species, representing the difference between growth and reproduction, even when reproduction is asexual.
G just grows, while R grows and reproduces in alternation. Why is the distinction important? The answer cannot be a genetic one in any simple sense because, as we have seen, mutations are just as likely to initiate genetic change during growth-mitosis as during reproduction-mitosis. I suggest that the important distinction between the two species is that a lineage of R is capable of evolving complex adaptations in a way that G is not. The reasoning goes as follows.
Consider again the past history of a gene, in this case a gene sitting in a cell of R. It has had a history of passing repeatedly from one 'vehicle' to another similar vehicle. Each of its successive bodies began as a single-celled propagule, then grew through a fixed cycle, then passed the gene on into a new single-celled propagule and hence a new multicellular body. Its history has been a cyclical one, and now here is the point. Since each of this long series of successive bodies developed anew from single-celled beginnings, it is possible for successive bodies to develop slightly differently from their predecessors. Evolution of complex body structure with organs, say a complex apparatus for catching insects like a Venus fly trap, is only possible if there is a cyclically repeating developmental process to evolve. I shall return to this point in a moment.
Meanwhile, compare G. A gene sitting in a young cell at the growing margin of the huge thallus has a history which is not cyclical, or is cyclical only at the cellular level. The ancestor of the present cell was another cell, and the career of the two cells was very similar. Each cell of an R plant, by contrast, has a definite place in the growth sequence. It is either near the centre of the 1-foot thallus, or near the rim, or at some particular place in between. It can therefore differentiate to fill its special role in its appointed place in an organ of the plant. A cell of G has no such specific developmental identity. All cells first appear at the growing margin, and later find themselves enclosed by other, younger cells. There is cyclicity only at the cellular level, which means that in G evolutionary change can take place only at the cellular level. Cells might improve on their predecessors in the cell lineage, developing more complex internal organelle structure, say. But the evolution of organs and adaptations at the multicellular level could not take place, because recurrent, cyclical development of whole groups of cells does not occur. It is, of course, true that in G the cells and their ancestors are in physical contact with other cells, and in this sense form a multicellular 'structure'. But as far as putting together complex multicellular organs is concerned, they might just as well have been free-swimming protozoa.
In order to put together a complex multicellular organ you need a complex developmental sequence. A complex developmental sequence has to have evolved from an earlier developmental sequence which was slightly less complex. There has to be an evolutionary progression of developmental sequences, each one in the series being a slight improvement on its predecessor. G does not have a recurring developmental sequence other than the high-frequency cycle of development at the single-cell level. Therefore it cannot evolve multicellular differentiation and organ-level complexity. To the extent that it can be said to have a multicellular developmental process at all, that development continues non-cyclically through geological time: the species makes no separation between the growth time-scale and the would-be evolution time-scale. The only high-frequency developmental cycle available to it is the cell cycle. R, on the other hand, has a multicellular developmental cycle which is fast compared with evolutionary time. Therefore, as the ages succeed, later developmental cycles can be different from earlier developmental cycles, and multicellular complexity can evolve. We are moving towards a definition of the organism as the unit which is initiated by a new act of reproduction via a single-celled developmental 'bottleneck'.
The importance of the difference between growth and reproduction is that each act of reproduction involves a new developmental cycle. Growth simply involves swelling of the existing body. When an aphid gives rise to a new aphid by parthenogenetic reproduction the new aphid, if it is a mutant, may be radically different from its predecessor. When an aphid grows to twice its original size, on the other hand, all its organs and complex structures simply swell. It might be said that somatic mutations could occur within cell lineages of the growing giant aphid. True, but a mutation within a somatic cell line in a heart, say, cannot radically re-organize the structure of the heart. To switch the example to vertebrates, if the present heart is two-chambered, with one auricle feeding one ventricle, new mutations in the mitotic cells at the growing margin of the heart are very unlikely to achieve radical restructuring of the heart so that it comes to have four chambers with a pulmonary circulation kept separate from the rest. In order to put together new complexity, new developmental beginnings are required. A new embryo must start from scratch, without any heart at all. Then a mutation can act on sensitive key points in early development to bring about a new fundamental architecture of the heart. Developmental recycling allows a return 'back to the drawing board' (see below) in every generation.
We began this chapter by wondering why replicators have ganged up into large, multicellular clones called organisms, and we initially gave a rather unsatisfactory answer. A more satisfying answer is now starting to emerge. An organism is the physical unit associated with one single life cycle. Replicators that gang up in multicellular organisms achieve a regularly recycling life history, and complex adaptations to aid their preservation, as they progress through evolutionary time.
Some animals have a life cycle involving more than one distinct body. A butterfly is utterly different from the caterpillar which preceded it. It is hard to imagine a butterfly growing from a caterpillar by slow, within-organ change: caterpillar organ growing into corresponding butterfly organ. Instead, what happens is that the complex organ structure of the caterpillar is largely broken down and the tissues of the caterpillar are used as fuel for the development of a whole new body. The new butterfly body does not quite restart from a single cell, but the principle is the same. It develops a radically new bodily structure from simple, relatively undifferentiated imaginal discs. There is a partial return to the drawing board.
Returning to the growth/reproduction distinction itself, Janzen was not actually wrong. Distinctions can be unimportant for some purposes, while they remain important for other purposes. For discussing certain kinds of ecological or economic questions, there may be no important distinction between growth and asexual reproduction. A sisterhood of aphids may indeed be analogous to a single bear. But for other purposes, for discussing the evolutionary putting together of complex organization, the distinction is crucial. A certain type of ecologist may gain illumination from comparing a field full of dandelions with a single tree. But for other purposes it is important to understand the differences, and to see the single dandelion ramet as analogous to the tree.
But Janzen's position is, in any case, a minority one. A more typical biologist might think it perverse of Janzen to regard asexual reproduction in aphids as growth, and equally perverse of Harper and me to regard vegetative propagation by multicellular runners, as growth and not reproduction. Our decision is based on the assumption that the runner is a multicellular meristem rather than a single-celled propagule, but why should we regard this as an important point? Again, the answer may be seen in a thought experiment involving two hypothetical species of plants, in this case strawberry-like plants called M and S (Dawkins in press).
Both the hypothetical strawberry-like species propagate vegetatively, by runner. In both there is a population of what appear to be distinct and recognizable 'plants' connected by a network of runners. In both species, each 'plant' (i.e. ramet) can give rise to more than one daughter plant, so that we have the possibility of exponential growth of the 'population' (or growth of the 'body' depending on your point of view). Even though there is no sex, there can be evolution since mutations will sometimes occur in the mitotic cell divisions (Whitham & Slobodchikoff in press). Now comes the crucial difference between the two species. In species M (for many, or multicellular, or meristem), the runner is a broad-fronted multicellular meristem. This means that two cells in any one 'plant' may be the mitotic descendants of two different cells in the parent plant. In terms of mitotic descent, a cell may therefore be a closer cousin of a cell in another 'plant' than it is of another cell in its own plant. If mutation has introduced genetic heterogeneity into the cell population, this means that individual plants may be genetic mosaics, with some cells having closer genetic relatives in other plants than in their own. We will see the consequences of this for evolution in a moment. Meanwhile we turn to the other hypothetical species.
Species S (for single) is exactly like M, except that each runner culminates in a single apical cell. This cell acts as the basal mitotic ancestor of all the cells of the new daughter plant. This means that all cells in a given plant are closer cousins to each other than they are to any cells in other plants. If mutation introduces genetic heterogeneity into the population of cells, there will be relatively few mosaic plants. Rather, each plant will tend to be a genetically uniform clone, but it may differ genetically from some other plants, while being genetically identical to yet other plants. There will be a true population of plants, each one of which has a genotype characteristic of all its cells. It is therefore possible to conceive of selection, in the sense which I have called 'vehicle selection', acting at the level of the whole plant. Some whole plants may be better than others, because of their superior genotypes.
In species M, especially if the runners are very broad-fronted meristems, a geneticist will not discern a population of plants at all. He will see a population of cells, each with its own genotype. Some cells will be genetically identical, others will have different genotypes. A form of natural selection might go on among cells, but it is hard to imagine selection among 'plants', because 'the plant' is not a unit that can be identified as having its own characteristic genotype. Rather, the whole mass of straggling vegetation will have to be regarded as a population of cells, with cells of any one genotype being untidily peppered across the different 'plants'. The unit which I have called the 'gene vehicle', and which Janzen has called the 'evolutionary individual', will, in such a case, be no larger than the cell. It is cells that will be the genetic competitors. Evolution may take the form of improvements in cell structure and physiology, but it is hard to see how it could take the form of improvements in individual plants or their organs.
It might be thought that improvements in organ structure could evolve, if it regularly happened that particular subpopulations of cells, in discrete areas of the plant, were a clone, descended from a single mitotic ancestor. For instance, the runner giving rise to a new 'plant' might be a broad-fronted meristem, but it might still be the case that each leaf sprang from a single cell at its own base. A leaf could therefore be a clone of cells more closely related to each other than to cells anywhere else in the plant. Given the commonness of somatic mutation in plants (Whitham & Slobodchikoff in press), might one not therefore imagine the evolution of improved complex adaptation at the level of the leaf, if not at the level of the whole plant? A geneticist could now discern a genetically heterogeneous population of leaves, each one made up of genetically homogenous cells, so might not natural selection go on between successful leaves and unsuccessful leaves? It would be tidy if the answer to this question could be yes; that is, if we could assert that vehicle selection will go on at any level in the hierarchy of multicellular units, provided that the cells within a unit tend to be genetically uniform compared with cells in other units at the same level. Unfortunately, however, something has been left out of the reasoning.
It will be remembered that I classified replicators into germ-line replicators and dead-end replicators. Natural selection results in some replicators becoming more numerous at the expense of rival replicators, but this leads to evolutionary change only if the replicators are in germ-lines. A multicellular unit qualifies as a vehicle, in an evolutionarily interesting sense, only if at least some of its cells contain germ-line replicators. Leaves normally do not so qualify, for their nuclei contain only dead-end replicators. Leaf cells synthesize chemical substances which ultimately benefit other cells that do contain germ-line copies of the leaf genes, the genes which gave the leaves their characteristically leafy phenotypes. But we cannot accept the conclusion of the previous paragraph, that inter-leaf vehicle selection, and inter-organ selection generally, could go on if only the cells within an organ were closer mitotic cousins than cells in different organs. Inter-leaf selection could have evolutionary consequences only if leaves directly spawned daughter leaves. Leaves are organs, not organisms. For inter-organ selection to occur, it is necessary that the organs concerned should have their own germ lines and do their own reproducing, and this they normally do not. Organs are parts of organisms, and reproduction is the prerogative of organisms.
For clarity I have been a bit extreme. There could be a range of intermediates between my two strawberry-like plants. Species M's runner was said to be a broad-fronted meristem, while species S's runner narrowed down to a one-celled bottleneck at the base of each new plant. But what if there was an intermediate species with a two-celled bottleneck at the base of each new plant? There are two main possibilities here. If the pattern of development is such that it is unpredictable which cells in the daughter plant will be descended from which of the two stem cells, the point I have made about developmental bottlenecks will simply be weakened quantitatively: genetic mosaics may occur in the population of plants, but there will still be a statistical tendency for cells to be genetically closer to fellow members of the same plant than to cells in other plants. Therefore we may still talk meaningfully about vehicle selection between plants in a population of plants, but the inter-plant selection pressure may have to be strong to outweigh selection among cells within plants. This is, incidentally, analogous to one of the conditions for 'kin-group selection' (Hamilton 1975a) to work. To make the analogy, we have only to see the plant as a 'group' of cells.
The second possibility arising out of the assumption of a two-celled bottleneck at the base of each plant is that the pattern of development of the species might be such that certain organs of the plant are always the mitotic descendants of a designated one of the two cells. For instance, cells of the root system might develop from a cell in the lower part of the runner, while the rest of the plant developed from the other cell, in the upper part of the runner. If, further, the lower cell is always descended from a root cell in the parent plant, while the upper cell is recruited from an above-ground cell in the parent plant, we would have an interesting situation. Root cells would be closer cousins of other root cells in the population at large than they would be of stalk and leaf cells in their 'own' plant. Mutation would open up the possibility of evolutionary change, but it would be split-level evolution. Genotypes below ground could evolve away from genotypes above ground, irrespective of apparent joint membership in discrete 'plants'. Theoretically we could even have a kind of within-organism 'speciation'.
To recapitulate, the significance of the difference between growth and reproduction is that reproduction permits a new beginning, a new developmental cycle and a new organism which may be an improvement, in terms of the fundamental organization of complex structure, over its predecessor. Of course it may not be an improvement, in which case its genetic basis will be eliminated by natural selection. But growth without reproduction does not even allow the possibility of radical change at the organ level, either in the direction of improvement or the reverse. It allows only superficial tinkering. You may divert a developing Bentley into a fully grown Rolls Royce, simply by tinkering with the assembly process at the late point where the radiator is added. But if you want to change a Ford into a Rolls Royce you must start at the drawing board, before the car starts 'growing' on the assembly line at all. The point about recurrent reproduction life cycles, and hence, by implication, the point about organisms, is that they allow repeated returns to the drawing board during evolutionary time.
We must beware here of the heresy of 'biotic' adaptationism (Williams 1966). We have seen that recurrent reproduction life cycles, i.e. 'organisms', make the evolution of complex organs possible. It is all too easy to treat this as a sufficient adaptive explanation for the existence of organismal life cycles, on the grounds that complex organs are, in some vague sense, a good idea. A related point is that repeated reproduction is possible only if individuals die (Maynard Smith 1969), but we should not therefore wish to say that individuals die as an adaptation to keep evolution going! The same could be said of mutation: its existence is a necessary precondition for evolution to occur, but it is nevertheless quite likely that natural selection has favoured evolution in the direction of a zero mutation rate—fortunately never attained (Williams 1966). The growth/reproduction/death type of life cycle—the multicellular clonal 'organism' type of life cycle—has had far-reaching consequences and was probably essential for the evolution of adaptive complexity, but this is not tantamount to an adaptive explanation for the existence of this type of life cycle. The Darwinian must begin by seeking immediate benefits to genes promoting this kind of life cycle, at the expense of their alleles. He may go on to acknowledge the possibility of other levels of selection, differential lineage extinction, say. But he must show the same circumspection in this difficult theoretical field as Fisher (1930a), Williams (1975) and Maynard Smith (1978a) brought to the analogous suggestions about sexual reproduction being there because it speeds up evolution.
The organism has the following attributes. It is either a single cell, or if it is multicellular its cells are close genetic kin of each other: they are descended from a single stem cell, which means that they have a more recent common ancestor with each other than with the cells of any other organism. The organism is a unit with a life cycle which, however complicated it may be, repeats the essential characteristics of previous life cycles, and may be an improvement on previous life cycles. The organism either consists of germ-line cells, or it contains germ-line cells as a subset of its own cells, or, as in the case of a sterile social insect worker, it is in a position to work for the welfare of germ-line cells in closely related organisms.
I have not aspired in this final chapter to give a completely satisfying answer to the question of why there are large multicellular organisms. I will be content if I can arouse new curiosity about the question. Instead of accepting that organisms exist and asking how adaptations benefit the organisms displaying them, I have tried to show that the very existence of organisms should be treated as a phenomenon deserving of explanation in its own right. Replicators exist. That is fundamental. Phenotypic manifestations of them, including extended phenotypic manifestations, may be expected to function as tools to keep replicators existing. Organisms are huge and complex assemblages of such tools, assemblages shared by gangs of replicators who in principle need not have gone around together but in fact do go around together and share a common interest in the survival and reproduction of the organism. As well as drawing attention to the phenomenon of the organism as one that needs explanation, I have tried in this last chapter to sketch the general direction in which we might proceed in seeking an explanation. It is only a preliminary sketch, but, for what it is worth, I summarize it here.
The replicators that exist tend to be the ones that are good at manipulating the world to their own advantage. In doing this they exploit the opportunities offered by their environments, and an important aspect of the environment of a replicator is other replicators and their phenotypic manifestations. Those replicators are successful whose beneficial phenotypic effects are conditional upon the presence of other replicators which happen to be common. These other replicators are also successful, otherwise they would not be common. The world therefore tends to become populated by mutually compatible sets of successful replicators, replicators that get on well together. In principle this applies to replicators in different gene pools, different species, classes, phyla and kingdoms. But a relationship of specially intimate mutual compatibility has grown up between subsets of replicators that share cell nuclei and, where the existence of sexual reproduction makes the expression meaningful, share gene-pools.
The cell nucleus as a population of uneasily cohabiting replicators is a remarkable phenomenon in itself. Just as remarkable, and quite distinct, is the phenomenon of multicellular cloning, the phenomenon of the multicellular organism. Replicators whose effects interact with those of other replicators to produce multicellular organisms achieve for themselves vehicles with complex organs and behaviour patterns. Complex organs and behaviour patterns are favoured in arms races. The evolution of complex organs and behaviour patterns is possible because the organism is an entity with a recurrent life cycle, each cycle beginning with a single cell. The fact that each cycle restarts in every generation from a single cell permits mutations to achieve radical evolutionary changes by going 'back to the drawing board' of embryological engineering. It also, by concentrating the efforts of all cells in the organism on the welfare of a narrow, shared germ-line, partly removes the 'temptation' for outlaws to work for their own private good at the expense of the other replicators with a stake in the same germ-line. The integrated multicellular organism is a phenomenon which has emerged as a result of natural selection on primitively independent selfish replicators. It has paid replicators to behave gregariously. The phenotypic power by which they ensure their survival is in principle extended and unbounded. In practice the organism has arisen as a partially bounded local concentration, a shared knot of replicator power.