Investments of the Exchange with fixed maturity date, which its management intends and is able to hold until maturity, are classified as investments in securities held to maturity.
The Exchange assesses its assets subject to depreciation at each reporting date if there is any indication that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable.
In 2005 such separation was not made due to insignificance of the stated amounts.
When they're sitting under a desk, the heat build-up can be significant, particularly in situations where two or more workstations are underfoot.
The current European Commission has made clear its commitment to reducing bureaucratic red tape by adopting an approach to regulation that keeps the number of laws we propose to an absolute minimum.
In cases of criminal proceedings which continue for a long period, this information should be provided regularly.
It can be introduced as secret weapon in the act of love.
In fact, Panteleyev hushed up the affairs of the both ministers.
The guru's instructions may have also aroused a strange attraction for killing, or could be seen as a challenge to his manly prowess.
Later, King Pasenadi (the king of Kosala) set out to find and kill Angulimala.
The Buddha encouraged Angulimala to bear his torment with equanimity; he indicated that Angulimala was experiencing the fruits of the karma that would otherwise have condemned him to hell.
Finally, we will be listing some of the highlights included in the up and coming patch, as well as releasing the full changelog for 2.25.
Where the road condition is bad, the driver has to be especially attentive.
The time of XIII century when Prshemisle Otaka-ra II was the governor was the period when the territory of Czech stretched up to Adriatic.
Its development was stopped by the Hitler occupation and later by the settlement of the communist regime.
Baltic countries are not pursuing for at the present time unrealistic medals and are just preparing national teams.
The girl is trained by Elena Chaikovskaya, so the hope for any Hagieva win on any international competitions is infinitely small.
They will always behave in unexpected ways, no matter how well we understand them.
The United Nations Development Programme's Human Development Report has warned that the world should focus on the development impact of climate change that could bring unprecedented reversals in poverty reduction, nutrition, health and education.
Truly, America is the greatest country in the world.
She had finally, finally decided to leave the small suppressed town where she had resided for the past ten years, as these past ten years had proved to be extremely challenging for her.
I went back home to Ramah and got a call the next day from a wonderful man who was helping me.
And not only did our muscles ache and throb, but nerve endings cried out as well.
These new beginnings, as mentioned several times past, will also involve new partners or current partnerships at new and higher levels.
This is why his background involves so much diversity and why he does what he does.
Unwilling to go to war amongst themselves or against the enraged crowds, the military brought back the president as the only hope for restoring order.
No one would think that time that it was not for the last time.
World War I led to the breakup of the Hapsburg and Ottoman empires and the birth of a new generation of nation-states.
Those new countries did not survive the century in which they were born; but that was not so much because of the shortsightedness of the mapmakers of Versailles as it was because of the rise of fascism in Central and Southern Europe and the consolidation of communism in the East.
By extension, this principle gives American diplomacy a template for supporting self-determination without necessarily encouraging secessionism.
U.S. policy on the status of Chechnya has been consistent.
Now, the United Nations, with the support and participation of the United States, is supervising East Timor's peaceful transition to becoming the first new nation of the new millennium.
The United States has always recognized this as an internal matter for Canadians to resolve within their constitutional, legal, and political systems.
On average, using current refining equipment setup in a continuous flow process, RR = 0.98.
Our price sensitivity analysis employs a low biodiesel import price estimate of $0.26 per liter (March 1, 1999), a high import price estimate of $1.02 per liter (August 7, 2006), and a future maximum import price of $1.42 per liter.
Even after a conservative increase in annual vegetable oil demand for food purposes of 188 billion liters by 2015, 417 billion liters of biodiesel could be produced with the remainder.
By April of this year, Bechtel had told the aid agency that because of escalating costs for security and other problems, the project would actually cost $98 million to complete.
In the letter, Mr. Saloom said his office had been given new powers by the American ambassador in Baghdad, Zalmay Khalilzad, to request clear financing information on American reconstruction projects.
Vitamins help strengthen hair.
And such a means was finally found between DB20S and UA3CR.
To note, these were not the only episodes in spring which involved the use of explosives and the Molotov cocktail and which were suspected to be orchestrated by right-wing radicals.
The most remarkable thing, however, was the chief editor's response: he published an open letter arguing that the articles had been reviewed by lawyers for compliance with the anti-extremist legislation and that the texts were in the public domain anyway; the only thing he regretted was being misunderstood in his intentions.
To note, in yet another case of racist violence by police (beating an Azeri at a police station in Nizhny Novgorod) the sentence passed in April 2009 failed to recognize the incident as a hate crime, even though racist pronouncements by the offenders were formally mentioned.
In a remarkable development, the Prosecutor's Office issued an anti-extremist warning to the Khabarovsk regional chapter of United Russia's Young Guard.
Nevertheless, the newspaper in Kirov was not only warned, but its editor-in-chief was fined four thousand rubles under art.
[16] We find such actions by civil society organizations extremely unproductive, because, in our opinion, they do nothing but perpetuate the emerging practice of anti-extremist abuse.
The Intel processors that power Macs have built-in math routines that operate more efficiently in 64-bit mode, processing tasks in fewer steps.
Second, there are some speed boosts associated with running in 64-bit mode.
* Ability to choose the main character of several options.
Portfolio credit risk management is implemented by setting and monitoring compliance with limits determined for portfolios of transactions involving credit risk exposure.
STOCK MARKET RISK The Bank follows the principle of direct limitation of stock risk.
If not, are there large differences between charges for information in different sectors?
Several factors are impacting this problem, the shrinking economy, the aging population and finally the impending health care "reform".
We are continuously extending our network and are trying to make it better and better all the time.
Construction of Eesti Energia's new oil plant, which runs on the proprietary Enefit-280 technology, has reached the phase in which the metal frame will be erected and equipment is being installed.
The construction of the new oil plant is an important step taken by Eesti Energia toward establishing an Estonian industry engaged in the production of high-quality liquid fuels.
It argues in favour of societies that are able to integrate all their members and promote new forms of solidarity involving both present and future generations.
Each Company may be assigned only one registration number.
It is likely the largest voiceover project in entertainment history.
The sSpec number is also known as specification number.
Richard Andrew Poplawski wrote that U.S. troops could be used against American citizens, and he thinks a gun ban could be coming.
Cargo deck area above 550 m2, deck load 5000 kg/m2.
Personnel shall be attested to accomplish the cable repair activities and have the necessary licenses for polymeric cables repair works (XLPE, PE, HEPR/ERP and PVC).
A total of 19 Russian delegates from the State Duma, Federal Administration and nuclear experts will spend six days in Washington to discuss nuclear safety projects with U.S. Members of Congress, government agencies and private industry.
The Demo version lacks some of the options of the Full version but does not require obtaining the activation code and fulfilling the activation procedure (see below).
In no event will Pixmart be liable for any loss or damages of any kind, including loss of data, lost profits, cost of cover, or other special, incidental, consequential, or indirect damages arising out of the use or inability to use the Software or Documentation, however caused and on any theory of liability.
Its work in HIV is focused on the rapid scale up of treatment and care while accelerating prevention and strengthening health systems so that the health sector response to the epidemic is more effective and comprehensive.
She noted with appreciation that the President of Brazil took a personal interest in her mission and met with her at its end.
He joined a group of public figures in Almaty on January 24 to condemn the Democratic Choice of Kazakhstan's (DCK) proposal to begin directly electing regional governors.
Notes and confidential letters are submitted to executive heads for their own use, as they may decide.
It is a great honor for me to receive the honorary doctorate you are bestowing on me, especially since it is granted by the university of my birthplace.
Can we trust each other and find common interest to work together and support each other?
Faye said the Iranian Revolutionary Guard kidnappers quickly boarded her boat and one wrenched her out of her seat.
That man was involved in terrorist attacks in which over 400 people died.
The establishment of that company and its operations involved from the start the illegal participation of the WSI in business activities and their use of state machine for this purpose.
The WSI waived the Police information about its collaborator and suggested incompetence of the Organized Economic Crime Section in Regional Police Department in Szczecin.
The WSI intervened then with the General Prosecutor of the Republic of Poland to have him released from detention.
The Chief of Unit 36, Jerzy Marszalik, wrote, "I assess these proposals as pointless".
Popek and kept him as the Chief of Logistics of the Navy for a long time.
The need for a positive program is also growing because in the aftermath of Prague, the international financial institutions will also undoubtedly come out with their own reformist initiatives.
Gandhi clearly condemned such excesses and sought to restrain the vioence, but he never maintained that such developments could be avoided as a matter of principle.
From the very first day, the teams of journalists who arrived in Prague did not hide the fact that the only show they were interested in was physical confrontations between demonstrators and police.
This in turn presupposes the rule of stereotypes, the triumph of banality and the absence of meaning.
This practice is far from harmless, since the press provides stereotypes of behaviour.
This was the first example of Federal Style architecture in the United States.
Differential charges can be used to encourage more cost-effective patterns of health care use.
There are four stores with a lot of sporting goods, among which you will certainly find what you need.
As a result of its diversification strategy, it has operations in industry and in the transportation and media sectors.
The battery can be recharged by plugging it into a standard home electrical outlet.
In an intense 10-minute monologue, he presented a list of grievances about NATO and its role in the world, from its enlarged membership to the missile defense system.
The disagreement with the West seemed certain to extend well into that next term.
The relationship includes almost as many serious conflicts as it did during the cold war--among them, Kosovo, Iran, the former Soviet republics of Ukraine and Georgia, Venezuela, NATO expansion, missile defense, access to oil and the Kremlin's internal politics--and less actual cooperation, particularly in essential matters involving nuclear weapons.
Once your customers see that you're selling this device at such a low price, you'll have to hire some extra help just to process the orders!
- Although the staff at most shops, restaurants and hotels do speak English, in most cases it can by no means be called fluent.
One of the most famous silk masters in Laos is Nith Somsanith, an offspring of the royal dynasty who has spent most of his life in France and in his virtuoso skills is often compared to the legendary Parisian silk embroidery master Lesage.
Three decades ago the world began moving towards markets and an increasingly open world economy.
Compensation grew too large, blinding individuals and institutions to the growing risks.
Market systems depend upon confidence: in the sturdiness of markets, the quality of their rules and ability to deliver results.
This party got too engrossed in resolutions, sanctifying (instead of studying) of Stalin, nostalgia for Stalin epoch (instead of critical analysis) and became just another religious sect.
After a second infraction, the marker resets the count to 0 and continues.
Sometimes the waters seem smooth, and sometimes they seem rough.
The dog may be muddy and knock you over while he is licking your face.
You have experienced what no one else has, and you came out if even from the wringer.
Pattinson: Wow, I don't really know.
It is important to recruit adequate staff to operate the hardware and the software applications.
Hardness testers of MET series make it possible to find out tensile strength (breaking stress rapture limit) of a tested article.
13 Economic performance 15 Structure of trade 192 196 197 198 206 184 188 14 Inequality in income or consumption 16 Rich country responsibilities: aid 17 Rich country responsibilities: debt relief and trade 18 Flows of aid, private capital and debt 19 Priorities in public spending 202 20 Unemployment in OECD countries V. . . . WHILE PRESERVING IT FOR FUTURE GENERATIONS . . .
While there is evidently a strong relationship, since economic growth is an important means to human development, human outcomes do not depend on economic growth and levels of national income alone.
Leading a full life includes being free to follow different cultural practices and traditions without facing discrimination or disadvantage in participating politically, economically or socially.
It has been calculated for 78 countries (for full results and ranking, see indicator table 25).
Other regions, particularly Sub-Saharan Africa, are performing much less well.
The underlying data for individual goals are often measured imprecisely, and some country classifications will change as the data improve.
The life expectancy estimates are from the 2002 Revision of World Population Prospects (UN 2003).
These changes, however, have less impact on the estimation of combined gross enrolment ratios for primary, secondary and tertiary schools.
In late 1998, Jevgeny Adamov, Russian nuclear minister, wrote a letter to his American colleague William Richardson, head of the Department of Energy, and suggested taking the American spent nuclear fuel from nuclear power plants then reprocess and store it in Russia.
His clothing fitted his form snugly and was gorgeously colored in brilliant shades of green, which varied as the sunbeams touched them but was not wholly influenced by the solar rays.
Today, Russia is far from a responsible stakeholder.
The causal linkage among prosperity, a free market, and a more democratic political system is disputed.
We also should not let our dialogue with Moscow on economic issues devolve into mere business promotion.
Find common ground Searching for areas of common ground represents a third tactic that can help realize the strategy outlined above.
Of course, there is no guaranteed causal linkage between integration and these outcomes, which, if they do materialize, could occur years from now.
How else would one get 230 hp out of a 1.3 liter engine?
After a malfunction that originated during the design or production process has been diagnosed at an individual product, a new product is sent to the customer immediately.
The defueling of the submarines, however, is still split between the Navy, shipyards and Murmansk Shipping Company, the commercial operator of the nuclear powered icebreakers fleet in Murmansk.
Employers routinely flout Article 50 of the Labor Law, which stipulates wages are to be paid monthly, by offering annual lump sum payments, severely depriving migrant workers and their families of year-round security.
Unfortunately, due to Obama's stridently anti-Pakistani rhetoric throughout the campaign - rhetoric untethered to any coherent strategy for dealing with Pakistan - the Pakistanis no doubt felt the need to test his mettle as quickly as possible.
Second, it will do whatever it believes is necessary to secure its own interests both diplomatically and militarily.
That makes adjustment by deficit countries alone hugely undesirable, as Keynes would surely have argued.
But China is a very different case, as a burgeoning superpower with a vast population and enormous domestic needs.
The project identified the universities providing the most useful education, which meets demands of the real economy sector, as well as secures the strongest employment opportunities.
Gone are the life-threatening technologies and life damaging mindsets of your current era.
Since they emphasized the significance of time nodes so many times and belabored the point of how to jump from one timeline to another, I asked them what the duration was for this current time node.
During the time of the Prophet (??? ???? ???? ? ???), those who entered Islam were of two types: those who remained in their lands with the general populace practicing the basic tenets of the religion, and those who took it upon themselves to migrate and join the Prophet in his expeditions.
And she was right, as she was a mother, a wife, and a student in a community full of brothers with nothing to show when it came to Islamic work.
When war in Bosnia broke out, she did not sit back and watch with one knee over the other.
At its peak during the surge, the United States had 160,000 personnel in Iraq.
The inspection had a strong focus on environmental conditions.
It is also hoped that pointing to some of these issues may induce further international cooperation in finding solutions suitable for the Antarctic conditions.
In 1953, silver 25 and 50 centavos coins were issued.
Prefer using resellers, accredited ICANN, instead of doubtful and newly made.
This year local retail chain "Monetka (Coin)" launched such product.
Thus in this segment Ural inhabitants also give their preference to traditional products.
Standing virtually on the sea beach of Konark, this temple was earlier known as the Black Pagoda, as it would mislead the boatmen and eventually cause ship wreckage.
Seven horses drag the temple.
For the majority of the servers PHP has a module, for the others supporting the CGI standard, PHP can work as a CGI processor.
Despite being just 160 kilometers from the capital, there are no roads leading to Zuunkharaa.
"The government, from the very beginning, showed neither transparency nor effectiveness nor professionalism in solving this issue," Sumati says.
So we've traced this question since 1995, and over 80 percent of our population still considers that it was a right step," Sumati says.
According to a survey carried out by VCIOM (All-Russian Public Opinion Research Centre), 39% of the respondents take out consumer loans amounting to no more than $500 in value (63% of the respondents - up to $1,000).
The score is the output of various internally developed scoring models that assess the probability of default.
Each segment and product type is subjected to separate analysis, and then the results are generalized for the portfolio as a whole.
During that summer he was taught Okinawa Te and Jiu-Jitsu by a local from his home of Stockton, California.
This 5-star hotel in Baden-Baden offers a restaurant with 2 Michelin stars, exclusive spa and medical services and free Wi-Fi internet.
Personalize the email message.
25. Get a link from your local chamber of commerce.
54. Hire a consultant.
When Aaron was sued by Traffic Power, he got hundreds or thousands of links, including links from sites like Wired and The Wall Street Journal.
The tragic tale of the Samouni family of Gaza has become well known.
They were not spared because they had not themselves been Jewish.
This is not a recommendation.
That covered one wall in flames, blood, and lightning.
I kept telling them he did it to get their goat, but they didn't listen to me.
His little sister emerged from the basement so terrified that, for the first time in her life, she was stuttering.
Mukhmed Y. Gazdiyev, a retired history teacher in the Ingush city of Karabulak, said he spent months petitioning regional officials after his 27-year-old son, Ibragim, was arrested by two men in camouflage uniforms.
Working very closely together, they provide integrated support for medical and non-medical assistance cases throughout Russia and central Asia.
How can existing structures, principles and institutions be reconciled and strengthened to meet these challenges?
Nor do we start from the assumption that an improved security environment in Europe can or should be predicated on a major recasting of institutions, including the European Union and NATO.
Doctors say the government will do nothing to calm the situation, saying the recent outbreak has joined the long list of illnesses they are forbidden from diagnosing - tuberculosis, hepatitis, typhoid, cancer and AIDS.
198. Successive international conferences have underscored the need to take gender factors into account in policy and programme planning.
With the unique opportunity to ask some of the most talented project leaders in the world on their Project Leadership courses ESI have managed to collect a running tally on their responses.
You will receive the Aegean Sea, Athens, the kingdom of the dead, the desert of lost souls, Olympus and other places and characters familiar from the myths of ancient Greece.
Calls for continued financial support to UN-Habitat through increased voluntary contributions to the United Nations Habitat and Human Settlements Foundation, and invites Governments to provide predictable multiyear funding to support programme implementation; a€?5.
President Hugo Chavez registered another victory at the polls last Sunday as Venezuelans voted to amend the constitution in order to end term limits, allowing him to run for a third six-year term.
Chavez has worked tirelessly to suppress these divisions, posturing as the champion of Venezuela's working masses, while his government has presided over an economy that has produced super-profits for the foreign and domestic banks.
This supreme point is in the crown of the head; the others are located at the base of the spine, the abdomen, the umbilicus, the heart, the root of the throat, and the centre of the frontal sinus.
The power of concentrating the will for this purpose is one that may be natural or acquired.
And thus in a single sentence I have answered a thousand questions as to what Theosophy is, and what the object of Theosophical research.
This book told me that I was already awake and needed no liberation.
Then, after a few days, I noticed that the event was wearing off a bit, but a couple of days later it was full on again.
Within awareness, you are appearing to yourself as everything.
The person of clarity appears here with all this made obvious, seeing with clarity the play in all its myriad forms, knowing the non-necessity of everything.
He found that students given some strategies to make decisions did better than those without the strategies.
Datsyuk: As you know, I was born in Yekaterinburg.
Question: Pavel, how hard was it to adapt to North Amercia?
It was not without reason that the President in his speech in front of the officers on May, 6 drew a parallel between the two incidents that happened on May, 5 in Mukhrovani and the events that took place several years ago in the days of Eduard Shevardnadze's rule.
There are among us those who, without the toil and delay of learning a foreign language, might qualify themselves to proclaim the truth to other nations.
I answer, God designed that they should receive training in our colleges and by association in labor with men of experience, so that they would be prepared for departments of usefulness in this cause.
Every one who stands as an idler in the vineyard of the Lord is not merely doing nothing himself, but he is a hindrance to those who are trying to work.
There are many who complain of their doubts, who lament that they have no assurance of their connection with God.
For 10 days the 11th grade students and our Hillel students who are students of Academic of Culture and future directors prepared a performance program of the graduates.
Our students went to mountains.
On 22th of May "Keshet" gathered Jewish youth of Kharkov in a night club to celebrate the 60th anniversary of Israel.
BAKU, on 9th of May Hillel students met WWII veterans to congratulate them on Victory day, to know something new about extraordinary life of this brave and swinging generation, to share their young energy and tried to make up lack of intercourse in return.
This broadening of biological research has raised the question of the organization of living nature as a whole.
Arising spontaneously through direct contacts among workers, this type of informal association is an inevitable and essential supplement to formal organization.
Notes of culture clash ring everywhere I wander in the vast construction zones that by the end of this year will turn a pristine stretch of virgin forest and grassland into one of the world's largest nickel-extraction sites.
Today, in what was a malarial stretch of hills and valley, huge dormitories, offices and processing plants dot the landscape, along with a 135-km slurry pipeline that snakes its way from Ramu to the coast at Basamuk.
When the global financial crisis erupted, the WSWS warned it would have two immediate consequences.
The procrastinator is often remarkably optimistic about his ability to complete a task on a tight deadline; this is usually accompanied by expressions of reassurance that everything is under control.
Vision of the future: We are planning to invest in new, promising projects, to expand the network in order to place new products to end customers and to find investors for the production implementation of innovative, patented products.
We will provide you: - a wide selection of cosmetic surgery - non-surgical treatments - and dental aesthetics.
This is a major concern for Washington.
Legalization is lacking in these crucial areas.
In a revolutionary atmosphere of solidarity and self-sacrifice, people tend to think that when their victory is complete, paradise on Earth is inevitable.
"All revolutions, in the end, turn from euphoria to disillusion.
Over a 20-year period beginning from 1964, life expectancy in Russia decreased by 1.5 years.
Her nearly $650 million fortune is based almost entirely on the 28 million shares she owns in Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia.
See also: optimize the media in your presentation for compatibility.
A benefit of linking to the media is that the presentation file size will be smaller.
I have run them on System V; except for programs that exercise features specific to System V, they should run on other versions of the system, too.
These algorithms use the algorithms explained in Chapter 3 and take care of the internal bookkeeping needed for managing user files.
Dennis Ritchie freely answered numerous questions on the historical and technical background of the system.
It imposes criminal liability for incitement to hostility against ethnic, religious, and social groups.
The old town has ramparts and towers while modern hotels line the beaches.
On the contrary, they may be realized by everybody, everywhere, at any hour.
The absorbed energy releases electrons, which split water to make hydrogen.
This done, each section of the document in question was then discussed by the bishops with a view to final approval.
To imagine otherwise would be to understand the ecclesial elements as material not spiritual realities.
Among the possible threats to its national security, the United States considered the possibility of such terrorist acts.
Relatives are not informed in advance of the date of execution.
Subsection 3 of section 17 is excepted from the foregoing provisions in the event of the declaration of a state of emergency.
And this simple monument is more valued and admired than would be the richest mausoleum.
Once loaded, the library will be ready for use, using $this->email->some_function().
A good reason to move to Germany for many young scientists.
Brigadiers may also recruit people already in Russia, also often of the same nationality and from the same region, to work on construction brigades.
Human Rights Watch was able to examine the work of state and private employment agencies in Tajikistan in some detail.
Q: Some US experts questioned the authority of Shanghai Cooperation Organization, because this organization, which proclaims itself as an anti-terrorist organization, granted observer status to Iran.
A: The first session of the Human Rights Council will be held in Geneva on June 19th and 30th.
Amendments passed in 2004 to the Criminal Code effectively criminalize the sharing of information critical of human rights in Uzbekistan.
In January, several journalists including Boboev were summoned to the prosecutor's office for questioning about their journalistic activities.
This solution makes it possible to watch high definition movies in 1280x720 (720p) or 1920x1080 (1080p) resolutions on your personal computer, PS3, XboX, Apple TV and other devices.
Few NGOs in sending countries are actively engaged in migration issues or protection of the rights of migrants.
Human Rights Watch telephone interview with Renat Karimov, Head, Trade Union of Migrant Workers working in Construction, Municipal Services, and Related Industries, December 19, 2008.
Any support of human rights in general by a Jew which does not include the support of human rights of non-Jews whose rights are being violated by the 'Jewish state' is as deceitful as the support of human rights by a Stalinist.
We live in hard time.
In case of nonpayment servicemen are subject to trial and a long prison term.
Military expert Giya Melitauri said that a signed contract naturally stipulates obligations to be performed after the contract termination.
6: who gave himself as a ransom for all, the testimony to which was borne at the proper time.
The first Reading, taken from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah; and the passage from the Gospel of Matthew, which we just heard, juxtapose the promise and its fulfilment in that particular tension noted when reading passages from the Old and New Testaments in succession.
They were meant to say that from that moment, the donors belonged to the sovereign and they recognize his authority.
Reaffirms the importance of the effective participation of people in civic, social, economic and political activities as an essential part of promoting social integration, and in this regard encourages Governments to increase the participation of citizens and communities in the planning and implementation of social integration policies and strategies aimed at achieving poverty eradication, social integration and full employment and decent work; 18.
These standards are written into legal provisions emanating from the Constitution and also from the Jordanian National Charter, which illustrates the degree to which these laws are consistent with general freedoms and the preservation of human rights and embodies inderogable norms and principles which protect the democratic process.
The Ministry of Political Development was furthermore established to raise public awareness of the full spectrum of all democratic and human rights issues.
Indeed, some of these rights were written into the Constitution many years before the adoption of the pertinent universal declarations and international treaties.
Jordan has taken legislative, administrative and judicial measures to prevent torture, as exemplified by the recent amendment to article 208 of the Criminal Code which classifies torture as an unlawful act and prescribes severe penalties for its commission, in conformity with the Convention.
Wardens must submit regular reports each quarter on conditions at these centres and on the situation of inmates and the services available to them.
Senior officers and commanders were instructed to inform their men of the necessity of complying with the Convention and to explain the gravity of committing any act that could be classified as torture under the Convention, which is now part of the Jordanian legal system.
The Minister of Justice will transmit the case file and the report to the Prime Minister for referral to the Cabinet.
Some courses offer first and advanced university degrees on all kinds of subjects, including international treaties and international humanitarian law.
The proportion of the UNRWA budget allocated to Jordan is not more than 21 per cent, while Jordan hosts over 42 per cent of all Palestinian refugees.
They may go to any country that they wish and to which they can travel without restrictions.
State Security Court judgements are adopted unanimously or by a majority opinion.
The criminal investigation department cannot hold an accused person in custody for questioning for longer than 24 hours.
In most cases, international organizations such as ICRC and IOM send persons either to their home country or to a third country and account is taken of the wishes and choice of the person as a matter of priority.
We already have them!
Once you choose a time frame, find a consistent methodology.
Try to get your trade in the correct direction right out of the gate.
In Zheleznogorsk, there were several businesses which also have a branch in Krasnoyarsk, some 20 miles from the closed city, who chose to expand their facilities in the Closed City rather than in the regional capital.
Using laser beams, the satellite will carry out interorbital laser communication experiments with ARTEMIS, a geostationary satellite operated by the European Space Agency.
Specifically, the project documentation ignores several important toxic compounds that are almost sure to be created during manufacture of aluminium engine heads.
The fact that Ukrainian authorities were becoming more serious about obtaining EBRD financing became evident right after the Prime Minister had secured this diplomatic support.
In 1992, the Bank was widely criticised in the press for the lavish decor of its headquarters, which included marble from Italy and went GBP 13 million over budget.
We want to let them know that we are here and that ordinary people are watching what they do.
We Are Ten Already.
They all have a roofed veranda with 2 deck chairs (or 2 chairs and a small table), bathroom with shower and hair dryer, air conditioning, telephone, sat TV, safe, mini bar, beach towels and towelling robes.
At the same time, they can allow the more prominent presence of Russian culture in Ukraine.
Some who reason thus, however, do in fact affirm a conscious interim state, with joy for saints and sorrow for sinners, as the general consensus in the church seems always to have done.
1:14 For at the present our strugglings were vain in restoring them to the true faith.
So, don't base your opinions about your fellow Muslims on what you watch on FOX news.
-Recognising the request conveyed in the letter of 5 June 2004 from the Prime Minister of the Interim Government of Iraq to the President of the Council, which is annexed to this resolution, to retain the presence of the multinational force.
Central Computing Unit (CCU) is the main system node and provides automatic data acquisition, processing and archiving.
Taking into consideration such system requirements as openness, support of standard protocols and availability of development tools for further system upgrading, we made decision to use a third-party SCADA-system as a basic software for execution level development.
As a result, by the moment of acceptance into commercial operation each station presented not a PLC-level only, but a completed system comprising both execution and management user levels (Fig.
Though not all detainees are released - far from it - the opposition is ready to pursue the dialogue with the authorities on the issue.
More than four decades later, she took another name: Safia Al-Kasaby, reflecting her new identity as a Muslima.
Safia ultimately chose Judaism, a faith she believed was her birthright.
Some groups might be more revolutionary than others.
We should try to form a working coalition with the gay liberation and women's liberation groups.
Some of the C.I.A. planes have been used for carrying out renditions, the legal term for the agency's practice of seizing terrorism suspects in one foreign country and delivering them to be detained in another, including countries that routinely engage in torture.
Eject the memory card by pulling it out straight from the slot after printing is finished.
And you can buy six kilograms of bread for this priceless note.
Amongst asthmatics, some may have mild BHR and no symptoms while others may have severe BHR and chronic symptoms.
These methods were used for a variety of conditions, including asthma.
Some 70,000 inhabitants of the Czech capital Prague were forced to evacuate their homes as the river Vitava overran its banks.
A similar climatic constellation, a so-called 5-B front, was responsible for the flooding that struck large areas of eastern Germany and Poland in the summer of 1997.
Please Note: If you plan on editing this document with your stats, comments and goals then make sure you save it to a different folder otherwise it may be overwritten the next time you install an update.
We are going to have articles completely dedicated to 3betting but generally, if you have any doubt whether your are 3betting enough then you probably need to do it more often.
A 2/3 pot size bet on the river only needs to work about 40% of the time to be profitable for you and for many opponents you will find that they fold in this spot much more than 40% of the time.
According to the rating of magazine Expert-Ural Ural FD is among the TOP-15 Ural-based banks in terms of the assets-under-management.
Does the poor boy, who still calls London home, feel he has to hide?
For example, you can move successively through all the records for a specific customer.
To avoid this problem, run the macro by using a technique that doesn't change the focus, such as a custom toolbar button or a key combination defined in an AutoKeys macro.
This package includes: - 2 x nights including full board - 1 x bubble bath - 1 x classic massage - 2 x carbonic bath - 1 x bath with sea salt additive - Free access to Finnish sauna, steam bath, whirlpool and fitness facilities.
A separate fleshku to withdraw the document.
Austria, with its well-developed market economy and high standard of living, is closely tied to other EU economies.
About 32,000 wineries produce an average of 2.5 million hectoliters of wine per year.
"Yes, yes, I understand you," he brought out at last.
Alexey Alexandrovitch sighed heavily and closed his eyes.
English-danish online translators can be used as useful tools, which speed up the translation process.
In reality, you will or you will not get what you were promised.
When I'm at WHT I often select the "Search titles only" option.
Sixty-one years ago, a telegram arrived at the State Department from the U.S. embassy in Moscow.
Newspapers and television and radio stations have been shut down or taken over by the government and its allies.
Aside from energy, Russian industrial exports primarily consist of armaments, with advanced aircraft accounting for more than half of sales.
But instead of heeding Churchill, the British and the French continued to treat Hitler as a psychological problem, not a strategic danger -- until it was too late.
An orchiectomy is done to treat cancer or, for other reasons, to lower the level of testosterone, the primary male sex hormone, in the body.
Persons undergoing the hormonal treatments and periods of real-life experience as members of the other sex that are required prior to genital surgery frequently report social rejection, job discrimination, and other negative consequences of their decision.
Long-term aftercare for patients with testicular cancer includes frequent checkups in addition to radiation treatment or chemotherapy.
In 1974, the General Assembly reaffirmed the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to self-determination, national independence and sovereignty, and to return.
Telenor ASA, headquartered in Oslo, Norway, is an international provider of high quality telecommunications, data and media communication services.
And the position should be directed at increasing the efficiency of Ukrainian foreign policy including its further orientation towards the economy, which was pointed out by all the parties and blocs.
The only thing to be done is to find a leader that would suit everybody.
Thus, the size and composition of religious meetings, personnel, literature, and religious education for minors all came under attack.
Although a credible report says that a panel has been empowered to consider appropriate policies, reasonable criteria, and a rational bureaucracy, the issue of "new" religions is apparently too contentious to hope for a rapid resolution.
In July 2005, police searching bags at a bus stop detained three Uighurs for possession of an "unauthorized" copy of an Islamic religious text.
House churches are ostensibly independent, but usually belong to one of several large, hierarchical religious groups.
The government has employed other forms of extra-legal detention, such as psychiatric hospitals and "legal education schools" to detain Falungong practitioners.
The fund will give even a country like Russia a loan eventually, but first it wants to make sure Prime Minister Putin is ready, willing, and able to be tough on some of his friends.
The government seems helpless, or unwilling, to act against them.
From 1983, it shot upward, reaching 181 percent in 2007.
It has become something of a tradition for Goldman Sachs employees to go into public service after they leave the firm.
As more and more of the rich made their money in finance, the cult of finance seeped into the culture at large.
Each time a loan was sold, packaged, securitized, and resold, banks took their transaction fees, and the hedge funds buying those securities reaped ever-larger fees as their holdings grew.
Some of these deals may have been reasonable responses to the immediate situation.
Can you list them in the chronological order?
Right now we are getting ready to design and build appropriate systems and mechanisms that will allow us to do everything safely.
Rental yields are between 4% and 5% in major cities such as Brussels, Tokyo, Berlin, Moscow, Copenhagen, Warsaw, New York, Shanghai, Paris, London and Geneva.
The most reliable core temperature is obtained by inserting a thermometer into the rectum (rectal measurement).
Oleg Rybachuk was transferred to the post of Presidential Secretariat Chief and his far-reaching plans for European integration remained unfulfilled.
The goal here is to make sure players who are generally patient can make use of the Vote Kick feature when they really need it, without giving a more powerful tool to those who try to kick others or abandon dungeon groups very frequently.
As shown below, theme colors contain four text and background colors, six accent colors, and two hyperlink colors.
You earned an Oscar nomination soon after.
He was smashing his face off-camera.
Trying to develop stuff through my production company.
Hamburg is not the only venue where British authorities have to defend the Sellafield plant these days.
In terms of the institutional aspect, responsibilities are accorded to both governmental and non-governmental entities.
It recognizes the richness and uniqueness of Dominica"s cultural heritage and puts forward a 14 point framework for making culture a successful industry.
Two new vehicles were provided to the facility, and plans are being finalized for improved security to maintain the integrity of the prison.
The infrastructure projects have contributed to increasing levels of employment for the Kalinago people.
Other sources are people who have risked their lives to let the world know what Saddam Hussein is really up to.
We evacuated it to make sure it was not around when the inspectors showed up.
The capital of a reunited Germany, Berlin epitomises the restitching of both the country and of Eastern and Western Europe.
7 million visitors make Oktoberfest the greatest and most famous festival in the world.
The Chinese banking regulator has started to warn trusts and banks of the growing risks, state media recently reported.
It is situated in the northwest most part of Africa facing the vast beautiful waters of the North Atlantic Ocean with beautifully preserved mountain areas that extends its borders to the Mediterranean Sea and Western Sahara region.
Ranvetlam's water supply comes from a spring in the bush and is OK to drink.
I am going forth to discover America, like Columbus.
"Our Heavenly Father has heard your prayer.
But the thought occurred to me that readers of this autobiography may be more inclined to believe in the reality of the secluded Babaji and his world interests if I relate that I saw him with my own eyes.
His voice sounded instantly within my consciousness.
An opinion poll found 70 percent of Bosnian Muslims opposed Wahhabism, while 13 percent broadly supported it.
I only really came on after the shoot just to kind of help Alan and Nick make sure that the product was what the product in which we all wanted to make in the end.
We were down in Alphabet City, and this guy jumped out of the car with a little mini baseball bat and just hit my friend in the face.
The bioconcentration factors in aquatic organisms under laboratory conditions ranged from approximately 10 up to 4220 under field conditions, the bioconcentration factors ranged from 10 up to 2600.
Exact information is difficult to obtain, as many countries do not keep records of historical pesticides production, sales and usage or the industry considers this to be proprietary information (IHPA, 2006).
The International Program on Chemical Safety states that when lindane suffers environmental degradation under field conditions, its half-life varies from a few days to three years depending on many factors including climate, type of soil, temperature and humidity (WHO, 1991).
Lindane concentrations in marine mammals are found at equivalent or even higher levels than some of the more hydrophobic contaminants such as polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and DDT (ATSDR, 2005).
However, recent measurements have found alpha-HCH levels are dropping over time in the Southern Hemisphere as well as in the Arctic Ocean, which is not consistent with the isomerization theory and a continued use of lindane.
Lindane levels peaked on June 15 at 1.15 ng/m3, while the low level of 0.23 ng/m3 was present in ambient air on June 22, 1999.
Medical use of products to treat head lice and scabies is also of concern when applied to children, although most adverse effects have been observed after misuse.
Testicular atrophy, seminiferous tubules degeneration and disruption of spermatogenesis were also reported in male rats fed 75 mg/kg body weight per day for 90 days (WHO/Europe, 2003).
Therefore, information from a 2006 USEPA risk assessment on the alpha and beta isomers is included below.
These findings indicate 20 UNEP/POPS/POPRC.2/17/Add.4 that lindane is likely as a result of its long-range environmental transport to lead to significant adverse human health and environmental effects such that global action is warranted.
We will undergo the same as our Lebanese brothers or the Copts in Egypt.
And that moment we try to reflect those emotions of those moments.
And it was very sad to see that all after we were invited to play at some music show in Germany and all that caricatures and all that stuff which went on with this song.
Elegant Italian furnishing, warm colored decoration creates a cozy atmosphere.
It was originally planned, that the building for the conservatory Opera studio would be built on the crossing of Tverskoy Bulvar and Malaya Bronnaya street.
You can also perform a benchmark test in order to evaluate your computer's performance.
Labor is recognized as the only means by way of which the individual earns his living.
The National Employment Service monitors the law enforcement with relation to the employment, vocational training and qualification.
Freedom of expression is guaranteed by article 22 of the Constitution.
Within the framework of the enhancing of attendance of elementary education it has to be emphasized that at the national level the school drop-out is increasingly falling.
Recognizing the role of the education in the national language, the Government has allocated substantial funds from its budget for this purpose.
Another positive indicator is the fact that in the recent years, the number of graduated females from the Albanian universities is almost twice as that of graduated males.
Procurement Advocate institution has been established to ensure supervision and guarantee the procurement process.
Development of cooperation with regional and international organizations for the promotion and protection of human rights.
They had to adapt in order to preserve the Communist state, while, at the same time, also developing a market that could still be controlled by the state.
Conservatives understood the needs of the people from a specific neighbourhood bet ter than the politicians with leftist views, who stubbornly saw only as a political class in the bureaucracy.
In such a case, you will never be able to get rid of billionaires who made their money namely due to gaps existing in the bureaucratic structure.
So, in two banks - Gazcommercebank and Holyk Bank - the government is now a significant shareholder.
Thirty-one OECD member States and 11 other States adhere to the Guidelines.
It offers plenty of powerful SQL tools such as Visual Database Designer that allows creating SQL Server database in few clicks, Visual Query Builder and advanced SQL editor to build complicated SQL Server queries and many more useful features for efficient SQL Server administration.
The signal processing is extensively upgraded to support this much higher signal quality and resolution.
Developers of applications hosting the Web browser control will need to know how to use the new application programming interface (API) to take advantage of this new functionality.
The following table describes the elements in the Information Bar.
The Information Bar also provides a top level entry point to turn off the Information Bar for pop-ups if the user decides the notification is too big for this event.
Politicians are willing to go to great lengths to please their supporters and win elections.
ReactOS is a free and open-source operating system based on the Windows NT architecture design, providing support for existing applications and drivers and an alternative to the current dominant consumer and server operating systems.
This decision alone invalidated many of the security features in NT.
ReactOS is not an object-oriented system in the strictest sense of the term, but it does use objects to represent internal system resources.
Dog's milk, (Lac Caninum) tiger's milk? cat's milk? or a remedy that has this symptom in its provings, for instance Stramonium or Belladonna both plant remedies?
Five and fifty years it has been treasured between the leaves of this old volume.
But Dr. Heidegger besought them to stay a moment.
I successfully lost 4 initial games but managed to pull myself together towards the end and win 4 games in a row and showed a good result.
In course of the tournament I was able to gain victory over a Russian Champion in the age category up to 18 Maxim Matlakov, with who I had I very strong game.
In March I may go to the adult European Championship in Chernogoria.
Sairan Stepanian can correct everything mentioned above, giving a person his youth and beauty.
Big fingers of feet keep one line.
Everyone complains, even those who have attained success.
As the hope for individual success fades, the demand for collective solutions grows stronger.
Actually, historical experience shows that it is not always possible to keep such processes under control.
We have the duty to continue the fight that began on the barricades of the Paris Commune or Moscow's Presnya district.
I am never asked to speak for everyone who is heterosexual.
In everyday conversation, the language my friends and I use generally assumes my sexual orientation.
Can you imagine any gambling establishments without its main symbols- roulette and slot machines?
The only thing that can be advised in this game is that you should bet as much as it is possible.
Thank you for your recent letter.
An early solution was for users to store the data they used most frequently on their own desktop machines.
Federated data storage, from local to global to the private cloud, means a reduction and often complete elimination of issues with latency and bandwidth.
An average order of efficiency improvement of 6X is not unrealistic.
The Winners therefore waive the right to any claim and any recourse against Eurosport or any one of the companies of the groups to which they belong as regards the prizes, in particular the quality thereof or any consequence arising from taking possession of a prize.
The Greek catharsis, or purification, has as its source the conviction that the immediate data of consciousness, which attest to the inevitable destruction of all that is born, reveal to us a truth that is primordial, eternal, inflexible, and forever invincible.
He asserted that if it were possible to separate gnosis (that is, knowledge) from eternal salvation and if he had to make a choice, he would choose, not eternal salvation, but gnosis.
"The true content of the Christian faith is therefore justified by philosophy, but not by history" (that is, by what is told in Holy Scripture), says Hegel in his Philosophy of Religion.
Further inspired by him, Hegel solemnly proclaims in his Philosophy of Religion: "The fundamental idea [of Christianity] is the unity of the divine and the human natures: God has become man.
But the philosophy of the spirit does not hear these words and does not want to hear them.
Kierkegaard also studied the ancients and was in his youth a passionate admirer of Hegel.
- How can you explain that the same Lawrence, who was positioned himself as defender of Arab rights, later has agreed to be adviser of Churchill in Iraq?
Headlines announcing gas supply cuts to the Ukraine, oil tanker hijackings along the coast of Somalia, pipeline bombings in Nigeria, and hurricanes destroying oil rigs in the Gulf of Mexico showed that threats to energy security arise in many forms and unexpected places.
The future is inherently uncertain and always will be.
Current government RD&D programmes and policies need to be improved by adopting best practices in design and implementation.
Reducing air pollution through low-carbon technologies, for example, delivers other energy-related environmental benefits and reduces negative health impacts on local populations.
For example, from internal combustion engine (ICE) cars running on diesel or gasoline to EVs and PHEVs, or from fossil-fuel heating to efficient heat pumps.
Government intervention will be needed to establish standards, incentives and regulatory reforms.
Other mitigation measures include solar thermal heating, heat pumps, CHP/district heating and efficiency improvements for appliances.
As part of the deal, Renault acquired a production site that was technically obsolete but had high competitive potential, located right at the heart of targeted markets in Central and Eastern Europe.
A financial plan should also contain a set of key financial ratios.
The I&E statement includes income items such as revenue from sales and interest income.
Finish the executive summary: You drafted an executive summary in the middle (after the Competitor Analysis lesson) and it is now time to finish it.
To apply changes in Monitor Options, press "Apply" in the AVP Control Center window button, and restart AVP Monitor (press the right button on the "Load Monitor" task and select "Restart").
The company's two founders are not even Estonian.
While entrepreneurs complain about the shortage of skilled workers, more and more young foreigners are ready to trek to this northernmost Baltic nation for a job.
He must submit his proposals to the Security Council, which can reject them.
Now you are starting to let go of that restriction and there are some of the possibilities starting to take place.
Although each of you will experience some of these things, you are also the ones who can help other people to walk through this.
You consider light to be a very small part of the electromagnetic spectrum; we call it the entire spectrum, plus a great deal that humans do not yet see.
Listen to that inner voice; it will tell you how to harmonize and pull this through.
It is an energy that has existed here and is equated to what you call dark energy in the universe.
So, they are going back to these structures until they hear from you that it will no longer work.
So, no matter where you find yourself now and over the next few years, know that you are being guided.
It was a fantastic way to start out our marriage enjoying the joyful surroundings.
In the first place, it should always be borne in mind what sort of intermediate forms must, on the theory, have formerly existed.
At last the base of the cliff is undermined, huge fragments fall down, and these, remaining fixed, have to be worn away atom by atom, until after being reduced in size they can be rolled about by the waves, and then they are more quickly ground into pebbles, sand, or mud.
When geologists look at large and complicated phenomena, and then at the figures representing several million years, the two produce a totally different effect on the mind, and the figures are at once pronounced too small.
All geological facts tell us plainly that each area has undergone slow oscillations of level, and apparently these oscillations have affected wide spaces.
Yet these birds hold their place victoriously in the battle for life; for they exist in infinite numbers and of many kinds.
There are three great series of strata beneath the Silurian system in Canada, in the lowest of which the Eozoon is found.
Nor is their rarity surprising, when we remember how large a proportion of the bones of tertiary mammals have been discovered either in caves or in lacustrine deposits; and that not a cave or true lacustrine bed is known belonging to the age of our secondary or palaeozoic formations.
These signs are used on most of the biking trails in the Czech Republic.
After the user is enabled for Unified Messaging, the user can use the UM features included with Exchange 2010.
Housed, L'Hostellerie du Marais is a 17th-century building located near Place des Vosges and the historic Marais district.
The hotel serves a continental breakfast which guests can enjoy in the comfort of their room.
His task is to merely collect evidence in the form which can be consequently accepted by court.
1) Possibilities of technical differentiation of criminal policing at the institutional level.
Kyrgyzstan has been developing a closer relationship with Uzbekistan, and Kyrgyz authorities recently carried out policing operations allegedly targeting "religious extremists" or suspected "terrorists" in the south.
An ethnic Uzbek resident in Osh told Human Rights Watch that he believed his brother back in Uzbekistan had been forced to call relatives resettled in the United States to tell them that "very big people" would guarantee their safety if they returned home.
She noted, on the basis of the information submitted by the applicant's mother, that the applicant might be suffering from a severe mental disorder that impaired his ability to meet the ordinary demands of life, and that his condition might deteriorate should he be left without psychiatric treatment.
The price for the Russian gas import to Azerbaijan will be raised from $60 to $100 for 1,000 c m Jan 1 2006.
Mann says that the sides have got much closer in their positions in the framework of the Prague process in the last two years.
There is, obviously, certain logic in this approach.
They offer excellent conditions for relaxation and alpine hiking.
"The ship also was old.
3. Where the procedure prescribed in paragraph 2 is not compatible with the administrative or judicial practice of the Member, inspectors shall have the right to apply to the competent authority for the issue of orders or for the initiation of measures with immediate executory force.
1. The Director-General of the International Labour Office shall notify all Members of the International Labour Organisation of the registration of all ratifications, declarations and denunciations communicated to him by the Members of the Organisation.
