Prepared by M. Deborah Wynes Mohamed Mounir Zahran Joint Inspection Unit Geneva 2011
United Nations Original: ENGLISH
United Nations, Geneva 2011
Transparency in the selection and appointment of senior managers in the United Nations Secretariat The report was prepared pursuant to paragraph 19 of General Assembly resolution 64/259, "Towards an accountability system in the United Nations Secretariat", and will be submitted to the General Assembly at the main part of its sixty-sixth session.
The objective of the study was to review the effectiveness, coherence, timeliness and transparency of the current selection and appointment processes of senior managers in the United Nations Secretariat and provide recommendations leading to enhanced transparency.
For the purpose of this report, senior managers are defined as the Deputy Secretary-General, Under-Secretaries-General and Assistant Secretaries-General; the scope is limited to the United Nations Secretariat.
Main findings and conclusions Member States are familiar with the process as outlined in the Secretary-General's report on accountability (A/64/640) and for the most part, no major concerns were expressed with the description of the process itself.
The concern is with the implementation of the process, which is seen as opaque, raising many questions as to how the process actually works.
Both the Member States and the Inspectors recognize the explicit discretionary power of the Secretary-General in making senior manager appointments, but the Inspectors believe discretionary authority does not mean that the Secretary-General has carte blanche to avoid the process that he has established; discretionary authority should not be used as an excuse to avoid transparency in that process.
The challenge is to strike a balance between providing enough information to Member States so they are confident that the process is open, fair and transparent without compromising the privacy of the candidates and jeopardizing the confidentiality of the deliberative process of either the interview panels or the Secretary-General himself.
The Inspectors believe that vacancy announcements should be issued for all positions, except for special envoys and personal advisers, as soon as it is known that a vacancy will arise.
Notes verbale transmitting vacancy announcements for every position should be sent to all Member States and all United Nations agencies, funds and programmes with at least one month's notice.
Frequently, Member States will nominate a candidate whose qualifications may not be suitable for a particular vacancy.
The Inspectors are convinced that merit should be the primary criteria in the selection of senior managers and that Member States are responsible for putting forward fully qualified candidates for the Secretary-General to consider.
A website should be set up to convey information on senior appointments to Member States and potential candidates.
The Inspectors found that interview panel members, who are the most senior officials in the Organization, spend their time on basic screening of candidates and that detailed reference checks are not performed.
Basic screening to filter out candidates who do not satisfy mandatory eligibility criteria should be performed by OHRM or its equivalent.
To avoid serious reputational risk to the Organization, once a short list is determined, all information provided by those candidates should be thoroughly vetted by OHRM or its equivalent, e.g., degrees, references, performance history, etc., before the interview panel forwards the list to the Secretary-General for decision.
The Secretary-General recognizes the political realities that he must reflect in the Organization, but reportedly no position is reserved for any Member State.
However, annex II shows that historically no Secretary-General has been immune to political pressure in this regard.
The Inspectors believe that if all vacancies are announced and announcements are sent to all Member States and the United Nations funds and programmes, the requirements of paragraph 3 (e) in resolution 46/232, whereby the General Assembly decided that as a general rule, no national of a Member State should succeed a national of that State in a senior post and that there should be no monopoly on senior posts by nationals of any State or group of States, should be satisfied.
For those positions where the United Nations General Assembly has decided that there be geographic rotation between the "North" and the "South", in the Inspectors' opinion candidacies should be sought only from the region whose turn it is to hold the position.
For example, assuming that a current incumbent is from the North and a successor should be from the South, notes verbale with the vacancy announcement requesting nominations of candidates for the upcoming vacancy should be sent to the Member States from the South only, with information to the Member States from the North.
Recommendations for consideration by the General Assembly The General Assembly should direct the Executive Office of the Secretary-General (EOSG) to set-up and maintain on a monthly basis a dedicated website which will convey specific information on senior appointments to Member States and potential candidates as described in paragraph 88 of this report.
The General Assembly should endorse the guidelines in paragraph 87 (a) to (l) of this report and direct the Secretary-General to follow the guidelines in selecting and appointing senior managers in tandem with the process outlined in the Secretary-General's accountability report.
Contents Page EXECUTIVE SUMMARY.
vi Chapter Paragraphs I.
Current selection and appointment processes V.
Under-Secretaries-General and Assistant Secretaries-General as of 31 December 2010
Historical overview of Under-Secretaries-General and Assistant Secretaries-General or equivalent ranks Overview of comments from the United Nations Secretariat on the JIU draft report Overview on action to be taken on recommendations ACABQ
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions ASG
African Union - United Nations BINUB
United Nations Integrated Office in Burundi BINUCA
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in the Central African Republic BNUB
United Nations Office in Burundi CMP
Capital Master Plan CTED
Counter-terrorism Committee Executive Directorate DESA
Department of Economic and Social Affairs DFS
Department of Field Support DGACM
Department for General Assembly and Conference Management DM
Department of Management DPA
Department of Political Affairs DPI
Department of Public Information DPKO
Department of Peacekeeping Operations DR Congo Democratic Republic of the Congo DSG
Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General DSS
Department of Safety and Security EOSG
Executive Office of the Secretary-General ERC
Emergency Relief Coordinator (OCHA)
FR Germany Federal Republic of Germany FT
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia HC
Interagency Advisory Panel ICT
Information and Communications Technology JIU
Joint African Union - United Nations Mediation Support Team MINURCAT
United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad MINURSO
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara MINUSTAH
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti MONUSCO
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo NGO
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs OCSS
Office of Central Support Services OHCHR
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights OHRLLS
Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States OHRM
Office of Human Resources Management OIOS
Office of Internal Oversight Services OPPBA
Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts OSRSG/CAAC
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict PBSO
Peacebuilding Support Office PRSG
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General RB
Republic of Korea RR
Senior Leadership Appointments Section SRSG
Special Representative of the Secretary-General UK
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland UN Women United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women UNAMA
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan UNAMI
United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq UNAMID
African Union/United Nations Hybrid operation in Darfur UNCTAD
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development UNDG
United Nations Development Group UNDOF
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force UNEP
United Nations Environment Programme UNFICYP
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus UN-Habitat United Nations Human Settlements Programme UNHCR
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees UNIFIL
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon UNIOSIL
United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone UNIPSIL
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Mission in Sierra Leone UNMIK
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo UNMIL
United Nations Mission in Liberia UNMIS
United Nations Mission in the Sudan UNMIT
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste UNOCI
United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire UNODC
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime UNOG
United Nations Office in Geneva UNOGBIS
United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau UNOLA
United Nations Office of Legal Affairs UNON
United Nations Office in Nairobi UNOV
United Nations Office in Vienna UNOWA
United Nations Office for West Africa UNPOS
United Nations Political Office for Somalia UNRWA
United Nations Relief and Works Agency UNSCO
Untied Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process UNSCOL
Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon UNTSO
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization USA
United States of America USG
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics WAE
When actually employed WFP
World Food Programme I. INTRODUCTION
Pursuant to paragraph 19 of General Assembly resolution 64/259, "Towards an accountability system in the United Nations Secretariat", the Joint Inspection Unit (JIU) included in its 2010 programme of work a review on possible measures to further enhance transparency in the selection and appointment process of senior managers.
The report is to be submitted to the General Assembly at the main part of its sixty-sixth session.
The request comes from the conclusion of Member States that the two reports of the Secretary-General on accountability show that insufficient progress has been made enhancing transparency in the recruitment process.
Selection and appointment of senior managers has been an issue since the founding of the United Nations in 1945.
There has always been and will continue to be a natural tension between the Secretary-General's authority to select and appoint senior staff and the desire of Member States to ensure that their nationals be placed in such positions.
This is further compounded by the need to respect as wide as possible geographical distribution and gender balance.
There is a widespread perception of a "non-transparent culture" in the selection process of these appointments, which needs to be addressed.
The objective of the study was to review the effectiveness, coherence, timeliness and transparency of the current selection and appointment processes of senior managers in the United Nations Secretariat and provide recommendations leading to enhanced transparency.
Senior managers are defined as the Deputy Secretary-General, Under-Secretaries-General and Assistant Secretaries-General.
Although the Secretary-General has a personal role in the selection and appointment of the Directors at the D-2 level, the review excluded this group because the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) performed an audit on the subject, the scope of which included D-1 and D-2 levels of Directors.
The scope of this review was confined to the United Nations Secretariat, pursuant to resolution 64/259, and excluded the heads of funds and programmes and other entities which were addressed in the JIU report on the "Selection and conditions of service of Executive Heads in the United Nations System Organizations".
In accordance with the internal standards and guidelines of the JIU and its internal working procedures, the methodology followed in preparing this report included an in-depth desk review, questionnaires, interviews, and in-depth analyses of policy documents and information gathered in this regard.
A detailed questionnaire was sent to the Executive Office of the Secretary-General.
On the basis of the responses received, the Inspectors conducted interviews with officials and also sought the views of a number of former officials, other international organizations, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and of representatives of Member States.
Comments from the United Nations Secretariat on the draft report have been sought and taken into account in finalizing the report (see annex III).
In accordance with article 11.2 of the JIU statute, this report has been finalized after consultation among the Inspectors so as to test its conclusions and recommendations against the collective wisdom of the Unit.
To facilitate the handling of the report and the implementation of its recommendations and the monitoring thereof, annex IV contains a table specifying those recommendations that require a decision by the General Assembly and those that can be acted upon by the Secretary-General.
The Inspectors wish to express their appreciation to all who assisted them in the preparation of this report, and particularly to those who participated in the interviews and so willingly shared their knowledge and expertise.
However, the Inspectors must point out their regret that, overall, the day-to-day cooperation of the Executive Office of the Secretary-General (EOSG) was not good.
A number of submissions in response to the team's requests were incomplete, ignored or simply were not provided despite numerous reminders.
The Inspectors note that it is they who determine what is and is not relevant for their work.
As such, the Inspectors intended to perform a review of a sample of files to test the selection and appointment process in place.
Unfortunately, access to the files was not granted under the pretext of confidentiality, despite article 6 (2) and (3) of the JIU Statute and despite confirming to the EOSG that the Inspectors were not interested in candidates' personal information or their identity.
It was only after the publication of the Unit's Annual Report (A/65/34) referencing this problem and after the receipt by the EOSG of this report in draft for their comment, that the Secretariat decided that the files could be made available to the Geneva-based Inspectors in a designated room in New York.
All costs associated with the second visit to New York would have to be absorbed by the JIU team; an offer too little and too late for this report.
This serves the Secretary-General poorly and gives credence to the notion that there is a culture of secrecy.
It reinforces Member States' calls for greater transparency in the selection and appointment process of senior managers, with which the Inspectors agree.
The Inspectors are, however, grateful to both Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and former Secretary-General Kofi Annan for spending considerable time with them.
It was important for this review to understand the pressures placed on the Secretary-General and how they factor into the decision-making processes.
According to the Charter of the United Nations, the Secretariat comprises a Secretary-General and "such staff as the Organization may require".
The Secretary-General is appointed by the General Assembly upon the recommendation of the Security Council and is the chief administrative officer of the Organization.
In the performance of their duties, the Secretary-General and the staff are not to seek or receive instructions from any Government or from any other authority external to the Organization.
They are to refrain from any action which might reflect on their position as international officials responsible only to the Organization.
The Secretary-General enjoys independence over questions of staffing with the paramount consideration in the employment of staff being the necessity of securing the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity.
The Charter further requires that "due regard shall be paid to the importance of recruiting the staff on as wide a geographical basis as possible".
Staff Regulations of the United Nations and provisional Staff Rules (Staff Regulations and Rules) reinforce the Charter by stating that the power of appointment of staff members rests with the Secretary-General.
Staff members are subject to the authority of the Secretary-General and to assignment by him to any of the activities or offices of the United Nations.
The Secretary-General can make exceptions to the Rules "provided that such exception is not inconsistent with any Staff Regulation or other decision of the General Assembly and provided further that it is agreed to by the staff member directly affected and is, in the opinion of the Secretary-General, not prejudicial to the interests of any other staff member or group of staff members".
Over the years there were many exceptions to the established rules for the recruitment, placement and promotion of staff.
As a result, the General Assembly adopted resolution 51/226 which, while reiterating its full support for the Secretary-General as the chief administrative officer of the Organization, deplored the high number of exceptions to the established procedures and requested:
"...the Secretary-General to announce all vacancies so as to give equal opportunity to all qualified staff and to encourage mobility, it being understood that the discretionary power of the Secretary-General of appointment and promotion outside the established procedures should be limited to his Executive Office and the under-secretary-general and assistant secretary-general levels, as well as special envoys at all levels".
The selection and appointment of senior managers has been an issue of both interest and concern to Member States since the founding of the United Nations in 1945.
It continues to be so to this day.
It has been discussed in the context of human resources management as well as peace issues.
On multiple occasions, the General Assembly has decided that reform and revitalization of the United Nations should be aimed at:
(a) Ensuring transparency in recruitment procedures and practices, including those for senior posts;
(b) Ensuring that the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity are the paramount considerations in the recruitment and performance of international civil servants;
(c) Ensuring a more effective application of the principle that the recruitment of staff should be on as wide a geographical basis as possible to improve the composition of the Secretariat and that at the senior and policy-making levels of the Secretariat, equitable representation of Member States exists, especially for those with inadequate representation at those levels, unrepresented and under-represented, in particular developing countries;
(d) Ensuring that, as a general rule, no national of a Member State should succeed a national of that State in a senior post and there should be no monopoly on senior posts by nationals of any state or group of States; and,
(e) Improving the representation and the status of women in the Secretariat, in particular at the higher echelons.
Most recently, in 2009 in its resolution 63/276, the General Assembly requested the Secretary-General to present measures to ensure transparency in the selection and appointment process of senior managers, including at the assistant secretary-general and under-secretary-general levels (A/64/683, para. 26).
In response, the report of the Secretary-General, "Towards an accountability system in the United Nations Secretariat" (A/64/640), presented the main steps of the selection and appointment process of these senior officials.
ACABQ recalled that the Secretary-General was to have developed "a framework and process for the open and transparent nomination and selection procedure for senior management positions that relates the qualifications and experience of candidates to available positions".
ACABQ concluded that the report of the Secretary-General "did not expand on specific measures to ensure transparency in the process and considered there had been insufficient progress in this regard (A/64/683, para. 28).
As a result, the General Assembly, in paragraph 19 of its resolution 64/259 of 29 March 2010, requested the Joint Inspection Unit to submit a report on possible measures to further enhance transparency in the selection and appointment process of senior managers at the main part of its sixty-sixth session.
In accordance with the statutory role of the Secretary-General and the concerns expressed by Member States, the Inspectors recommend the adoption of guidelines and the establishment of a website, both of which are referred to throughout this report, and in particular in paragraphs 87 and 88 below, as a means to enhance transparency in the selection and appointment of senior managers.
Distinction needs to be made between the levels and functions of senior managers.
Under-Secretary-General (USG) and Assistant Secretary-General (ASG) are terms used to describe a rank, a grade, and a level of appointment.
Senior managers at these levels can perform the following functions:
(a) Be a Deputy Secretary-General
(b) Be a head or a deputy head of a department
(c) Be a Special Representative of the Secretary-General, an Envoy or perform another special high-level function, as explained below Another difference to note is the place where these individuals live and work.
While those in the first and second group live and work in one of the headquarters locations, for individuals in the third group, the place is determined based on the function they perform.
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General, their Deputies and Force Commanders reside in the field mission where they work; Special Envoys, Envoys and other special high-level functionaries only visit the area they are responsible for from time to time.
A. Definitions The Inspectors discovered during this review innumerable Under-Secretary and Assistant Secretary-General positions and titles, and sought definitions from the EOSG in an effort to provide an understanding and clarification among them.
Notwithstanding the definitions provided (which in the interest of brevity have been shortened), the Inspectors believe there is a clear need to rationalize and streamline the number and title of these positions.
The post of Deputy Secretary-General (DSG), established in 1997, is an integral part of the Office of the Secretary-General.
The incumbent has the grade of Under-Secretary-General, but holds the title of Deputy Secretary-General.
The DSG is appointed following consultations with Member States and in accordance with Article 101 of the Charter of the United Nations.
The terms of office of the DSG do not exceed that of the Secretary-General.
Head or a Deputy Head of a Department Under-Secretaries-General and Assistant Secretaries-General, in addition to being titles used to distinguish a rank, are also titles used for certain, primarily Headquarters-based positions, such as Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, Under-Secretary-General for Economic and Social Affairs, or Assistant Secretary-General for Field Support.
Special Representatives, Envoys and Other Special High-Level Functions Representatives of the Secretary-General serve at the level and title designated by him.
Such designation can be prescribed by the Security Council or the General Assembly, and often the Secretary-General advises the Security Council of the appointment of his special representatives for Security Council-mandated peacekeeping, peacebuilding, and special political missions.
Special representatives of the Secretary-General are usually designated at the Under-Secretary-General level (a) as head of a field mission, in accordance with a Security Council or General Assembly mandate (i.e. the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for UNAMI or UNAMA), (b) in pursuance of an initiative of the Secretary-General's good offices (i.e. negotiations in compliance with Security Council resolutions), and (c) as representatives of the Secretary-General on thematic issues (i.e. the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for migration).
Deputy Special Representatives of the Secretary-General are appointed at the Assistant Secretary-General level, or lower, to assist Special Representatives with their diplomatic, political and managerial responsibilities (i.e. Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General for MINUSTAH).
For those missions that have a major military component, the Force Commander is appointed at the Assistant Secretary-General level (i.e. Force Commander for MONUSCO).
These individuals are seconded from their Governments.
The Secretary-General also appoints at Under-Secretary or Assistant Secretary-General level:
(a) Representatives (i.e. Representative of the Secretary-General on the human rights for internally displaced persons);
(b) Executive Representatives who perform multi-hatted functions as heads of integrated offices (see paragraph 44, for example, the Executive Representative of the Secretary-General for the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL));
(c) High Representatives such as Special Representatives of the Secretary-General can be appointed for a thematic issue or based on a Security Council resolution for functions such as heading a dialogue, representing a group of countries, monitoring an electoral process or coordinating activities of the Organization in the civilian aspects of a peace process (High Representative of the Secretary-General for the Alliance of Civilizations);
(d) Personal Representatives to attend specific international conferences, meetings and/or negotiations on behalf of the Secretary-General (the Personal Representative of the Secretary-General on the Border Controversy between Guyana and Venezuela).
Special Envoys of the Secretary-General are usually assigned at the Under-Secretary-General level to undertake a special mission relating to matters of which the Security Council or the General Assembly are seized (the Special Envoy for the implementation of Security Council resolution 1559 (2004) or Special Envoy for Haiti).
Envoys of the Secretary-General are assigned at the Assistant Secretary-General level, or lower (as at 31 December 2010 there are no examples of Envoys).
Personal Envoys of the Secretary-General are assigned at any level to undertake a mission in pursuance of an initiative of the Secretary-General (the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General for Western Sahara).
Special Advisers to the Secretary-General, normally at the Under-Secretary-General or Assistant Secretary-General level, are assigned to advise the Secretary-General in regard to specific subject matters on an ad hoc basis (the Special Adviser for the Prevention of Genocide).
High-level Coordinators, normally at the Under-Secretary-General level, are appointed by the Secretary-General to report to the Security Council on the fulfilment of a resolution (i.e. the High-level Coordinator for compliance by Iraq with its obligations regarding the repatriation or return of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals or their remains, as well as the return of all Kuwaiti property, including archives seized by Iraq).
Special Coordinator, normally at the Under-Secretary-General level, is a Special or Personal Representative who coordinates the work of the United Nations and represents the Secretary-General on all political aspects of the United Nations work in a country (i.e. the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process).
Senior Coordinators, usually assigned at the Assistant Secretary-General level, are the most senior public experts in a certain field who ensure that the United Nations system makes an effective and coordinated contribution to a given issue of global concern (i.e. the Senior Coordinator for Avian and Human Influenza).
In addition, there is a Chief Mediator and a Deputy Chief Mediator for which no definitions were provided.
B. Current selection and appointment processes Duration and types of appointments The appointment of Under-Secretaries-General and Assistant Secretaries-General is normally for a period of up to five years, subject to prolongation or renewal.
By practice, contracts are, however, most commonly issued on a yearly basis.
The general provisions for the use of "When actually employed" (WAE) contracts for special representatives, envoys and other special high-level positions are contained in ST/SGB/283 of 29 August 1996.
WAE contracts are used when there is a need (a) for work of an intermittent or discontinuous nature, (b) for assignments whose duration is uncertain, or whose timing is not clearly identifiable in advance, or (c) to ensure the availability at short notice of persons with special skills required by the Organization.
WAE contracts are to be used when standard appointments under Staff Rules or standard special service agreements would not be appropriate, for example, in peacekeeping operations or special assignments for the Secretary-General.
Individuals working on dollar-a-year contracts have fixed-term appointments.
Such contracts are used on an exceptional basis, limited to high-level appointments and are not to be used for all forms of volunteer service/gratis personnel.
Dollar-a-year contracts are considered a form of volunteer service and are distinguished from gratis personnel in that there is no payment from an individual Government.
The processes The Secretary-General has in most cases of senior appointments the ultimate authority to make the final selection, taking into account other factors, such as geographical distribution and gender balance.
The Secretary-General's report on accountability documents the current process for the selection and appointment of senior managers, which the Inspectors now understand to be related in the main to USGs and ASGs primarily based at headquarters or headquarters locations such as Geneva, Vienna and Nairobi:
(a) Upcoming openings are reviewed on an ongoing basis in order to commence the required selection process in a timely manner;
(b) Predetermined criteria, against which the candidates are to be reviewed, are established and reflected in the terms of reference of the interview panel and conveyed to the Member States when soliciting nominations;
(c) In order to ensure a diverse pool of qualified candidates for such positions, a notification is sent to Member States through a note verbale and an advertisement is placed in suitable print media and United Nations websites, as needed, to complement the Secretary-General's own search efforts;
(d) The consideration of the candidates includes review and advice by a panel of senior United Nations officials with relevant knowledge and experience drawn from the United Nations Secretariat and/or the funds and programmes, as well as outside experts as deemed necessary;
(e) The most suitable final candidates, of which at least one is a woman, are submitted to the Secretary-General for final decision;
(f) The Secretary-General personally interviews the finalists, as appropriate, prior to making his decision;
(g) For some positions, consultations with intergovernmental bodies are required and conducted accordingly.
The Inspectors learned that, in addition to the process outlined in the accountability report above, there are a number of other processes in place for senior appointments.
However, the Inspectors consider them a variation on theme in that they arguably could be subsumed under (a)-(g) above (e.g., field appointments and appointments related to other special high-level functions).
This may explain why the Secretary-General did not point out these different processes in the accountability report.
There is no written process in place for the selection of the Deputy Secretary-General, but the process of how the current Deputy Secretary-General was selected was described to the Inspectors as follows:
(a) The Secretary-General considered names of potential candidates based on his own search efforts and following his review of high-level persons, either known to him or brought to his attention for consideration. (The Secretary-General knew the current DSG from their previous roles as foreign ministers of their respective countries.);
(b) Various interactions were undertaken between the potential candidates and the Secretary-General beforehand given the sensitivity of the appointment.
The incumbent had to be able to establish a relationship of trust with the Secretary-General and have the necessary calibre and expertise for such a high-level appointment;
(c) The Secretary-General appointed his Deputy following confidential consultations with Member States.
Field operations The Department of Field Support (DFS), and within it, the Senior Leadership Appointments Section (SLAS), plays an essential role in the administration of the senior field leadership selection process.
The core functions of SLAS are stated in ST/SGB/2010/2, paragraph 4.5.
The process is essentially the same for all field appointments and can be summarized as follows, unless the selection is for one of the "multi-hatted" positions (para. 44 below):
(a) Leadership requirements are reviewed and identified on a monthly basis in order to plan and manage the selection process in a timely manner.
Thus, most vacancies are known in advance, however, some vacancies do occur on short notice;
(b) Post specific terms of reference and post profile are developed and/or updated and serve as the criterion against which potential candidates are reviewed;
(c) The Secretary-General may decide to advertise the position or send a notification to Member States through a Note Verbale (e.g., Force Commander posts).
Caution is exercised not to advertise senior field positions too soon, so that the incumbent's relationships with his/her counterparts on the ground are not compromised;
(d) A shortlist of potentially suited candidates is generated in consultation with the EOSG, lead departments, existing mission leadership and other key stakeholders.
The Senior Leadership Database (LEAD) managed by the Department of Field Support serves as an important source for the identification of potential candidates;
(e) In generating a slate of candidates, consideration is paid to organizational objectives of gender and geographical representation as well as to candidates from troop and police contributing countries (for DPKO-led missions).
The missions' operating environment, including the United Nations' existing leadership complement on the ground, will factor into the process;
(f) Short-listed candidates are normally evaluated through formal interdepartmental interview panels, the outcome of which is presented for the Secretary-General's consideration.
In accordance with the Secretary-General's directives, three candidates are presented to the Secretary-General, of which at least one must be a woman.
In those cases where a woman is not presented, a written explanation highlights the circumstances;
(g) The Secretary-General takes the final decision based on the panel's recommendation and may decide to personally interview the finalist/s before taking a decision;
(h) Formal or informal consultations may be required with regional organizations or Member States.
Multi-hatted field positions The Resident Coordinator (RC) position is normally combined with the Resident Representative position and may also serve as the Designated Official and/or the Humanitarian Coordinator.
Normally RCs are D-1 or D-2 level, but in those countries with peacekeeping and/or political missions the RC can be at ASG level.
In such cases, RCs wear several hats (i.e. the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the United Nations Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator).
The RC recruitment process is described in the Guidelines for the Selection and Appointments of Resident Coordinators (30 November 2009).
The positions are open to candidates from the entire United Nations system and external candidates.
However, both internal and external candidates must be nominated by a United Nations entity, an individual cannot apply to such positions independently.
To be eligible for RC positions candidates are required to take a competency-based assessment after which they are placed in the RC pool.
Nominated candidates are short-listed by the Interagency Advisory Panel (IAAP), interviewed, and the final short-list is submitted to the Secretary-General for his decision.
In the Inspectors' view, all Resident Coordinator pool members, given the extensive qualification process, should be able to apply independently for RC positions and not be dependent on being nominated by their entity of origin.
(a) Departments or offices backstopping such mandates are consulted regarding the terms of reference and selection criteria for such positions;
(b) In some cases the Secretary-General relies on the substantive department concerned for the initial search, interview and identification of finalists before proceeding with the final appointment.
Appointments governed by specific General Assembly resolutions A number of senior appointments are governed by specific General Assembly resolutions: Commissioner-General of UNRWA, High-Commissioner for Refugees, Secretary-General of UNCTAD, Executive Director of UNEP, High Commissioner for Human Rights, Under-Secretaries-General for Internal Oversight Services, UN Habitat, Safety and Security, UN Women and the Assistant Secretary-General for Peacebuilding Support.
Various stipulations are placed on their appointment process ranging from term limits, due regard for equitable geographical representation or rotation, requirement for consultations with Member States and General Assembly approval or election of the nominee etc.
The Inspectors found that Member States were familiar with the process as outlined in the Secretary-General's accountability report and that, for the most part, no major concerns were expressed with the description of the process itself.
In fact, some felt it was good.
It is the implementation of the process which is of major concern; it is not seen as transparent, but opaque, raising many questions as to how the process actually works.
The Inspectors share these concerns.
While all recognized the explicit discretionary power of the Secretary-General in making these appointments and the need to hold him accountable for his choices, they nevertheless felt there was significant room for improvement leading to more transparency.
The Inspectors believe the discretionary authority does not mean that the Secretary-General has carte blanche to avoid the process he himself has established.
The General Assembly itself is free to put guidelines on the process because this does not affect the Secretary-General's ability to choose a candidate; the Secretary-General's discretionary authority cannot be used as an excuse to avoid transparency in the process.
The process can be transparent while preserving the Secretary-General's ultimate authority to select the person for the job.
The Inspectors are pleased that the Secretary-General has developed a process, as evidenced in the Accountability report (para. 40 above), which, if coupled with the guidelines in this report (para. 87) and the establishment of a dedicated website (para. 88) should ensure an open and transparent selection and recruitment process for senior managers.
The challenge is to strike a balance between providing enough information to Member States so that they are confident that the process is open and transparent without compromising the privacy of the candidates and interview panel members.
They believe that the process in place as described in the Accountability report best keeps this balance and protects it from undue political pressure.
The Inspectors agree on the need for the privacy of candidates and interview panel members.
This however does not mean that the process has to be so closely guarded such that Member States have no idea or understanding of the senior appointment process and its raison d'être.
The following are the Inspectors' findings related to and paralleling the process steps described in the Accountability report (para. 40 above).
Timing of the review of upcoming vacancies Member States are concerned that appointments are not always made on time, that there is almost no overlap between incumbents, that the actual recruitment process is sometimes too long and that positions are vacant for long periods of time.
The Inspectors share these concerns.
Despite the fact that OHRM provides the EOSG with a monthly list of senior appointments, including such data as expiry date of each appointment and the EOSG using this information to monitor appointments due to expire within a four-month period, the problem persists.
The EOSG needs to be more vigilant in order to process the necessary extensions or to initiate succession planning so that it is timely, gaps do not exist, and to the extent possible that there is a minimum two week overlap with incumbents.
For field appointments, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the Department of Field Support and the Department of Political Affairs collaborate with the EOSG to identify appointments that require consideration for extension or replacement within three months from the date of expiry.
In these cases, the EOSG explained that the process cannot be started too soon because the incumbents in place could lose their working relationship with the relevant counterparts and be turned into a "lame duck" too quickly.
Guidelines, para.87: a. Allow two-week overlap b. All vacancies announced j. Deviations from the process disclosed in advance In exceptional cases, appointments have to be made urgently, such as the appointment of the SRSG in Haiti and the resulting ASG appointment in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
While the Inspectors understand that there might be an occasional exception to the rule, the process more often than not should be predictable, familiar and consistent.
When the Secretary-General determines it necessary to deviate from the established process, this should be stated upfront and he should inform Member States of the reason for any such deviation.
Delays in the appointment imply costs to the organization, the most obvious of which is the absence of leadership.
The Inspectors believe that if the guidelines in paragraph 87 (a), (b), and (j) are followed, this issue will be addressed.
Vacancy announcements and solicitation of nominations Predetermined criteria The Inspectors were informed that once upcoming openings are determined, the EOSG and the department concerned examine any General Assembly resolution or legislative instrument for mandate and objectives.
Existing terms of reference are also examined and revised as needed.
The terms of reference or profile developed are the criteria against which the qualifications of the candidates are assessed.
Vacancy announcements It is clear that not all vacancies are announced or known to all Member States.
At times nominations are solicited from Member States via notes verbale, sometimes vacancies are advertised online and/or in print media.
However, there is not a clear, consistent and established procedure.
Other times there is no vacancy announcement as is the case for SRSG positions.
Advertising The EOSG explained that a position is advertised in the print media if the position is technical, and a wide pool of candidates is needed.
Generally these positions are advertised in The Economist magazine due to its wide circulation, although at times depending on the profile of the position the EOSG would also place advertisements in Le Monde, Jeune Afrique, and/or The Asia Star.
Some positions are advertised also on iSeek for Member States and on the Internet.
Notes verbale Member States are concerned that they do not receive notes verbale for each vacancy.
The EOSG explained that, when the current Secretary-General took office, he used his discretionary power considerably in forming his cabinet, and will plan to do so again if re-elected.
They noted, however, that Member States have been notified of all subsequent senior management vacancies through notes verbale with the exception of USG/DGACM and USG/OCHA vacancies.
Calls for nominations are sent to all 192 Member States, primarily to complement the Secretary-General's own search efforts and to help compile a broader, more geographically-balanced or gender-balanced list of candidates.
Such correspondence describes the main elements of the position and the profile of the candidates the Secretary-General is seeking to identify.
Member States traditionally provide a curriculum vitae or biography of their nominee(s).
The above explanation makes it clear that when the EOSG talks about transparency in selection and recruitment of senior managers, it is talking about headquarters-based positions only.
The Inspectors found that a whole group of vacancies for senior field-based positions is not advertised and there are no vacancy announcements or notes verbale sent to Member States.
There is, however, the LEAD database and outreach to Member States by SLAS/DFS to identify the individuals who match the requirements of the position.
The names are then provided to the USGs for DFS/DPKO/DPA and ultimately to the Secretary-General.
The Inspectors recognize that progress has been made in the selection of senior field managers (SRSGs, DSRSGs) since the establishment of SLAS/DFS in 2006, which is essentially a service provider to lead departments in need of candidates.
The effort is not only put in finding the right persons for the job, but in establishing the right leadership teams that will complement each other in the field which is critical for the effective functioning of the Mission.
Guidelines, para. 87: c. Announcements are sent to all Member States and UN agencies, funds and programmes Recommendation 1: A website is set up to convey information on senior appointments to Member States and potential candidates The Inspectors recognize that this is a complicated, political process involving Member States' interests and interests inside the organization and in the field.
They also recognize that the type of people required to do these types of jobs are not found everywhere and that they need to be current in the political environment.
They welcome DFS' planned improvement to the process to invite annually all Member States to send nominations for inclusion in the database.
However, the Inspectors see no reason why all vacancies when they occur, including field-based, should not be communicated to all Member States.
In the Inspectors' view, if the guidelines in paragraph 87 (b) and (c) are followed and recommendation 1 in paragraph 90 is implemented both the Member States and the potential candidates will be informed of all upcoming vacancies.
Member States Responsibilities As a general rule, Member States are requested to submit nominations for candidates within a month from when the note verbale is sent.
A number of Member States felt this did not accord them sufficient time to submit a nomination given the need to communicate with their capitals.
In the Inspectors' view, Member States should be vigilant in finding and nominating suitable candidates for vacancies.
They can proactively search for good candidates to nominate before formal vacancy announcements are received.
In this regard, the Inspectors believe that the annual call to Member States to nominate candidates for field positions, which is planned to be implemented by DFS in 2011, can be expanded by the Secretariat to include all positions that may become vacant in a year, not just field positions.
For those positions which cannot be determined that far in advance, the EOSGs practice of one month official notification seems reasonable.
Additionally, the Inspectors believe the Secretariat, Member States and potential candidates would benefit significantly were a dedicated website established that would include comprehensive information regarding all upcoming senior management vacancies, including field positions.
Frequently, Member States will nominate a candidate whose qualifications may not be suitable for a particular vacancy.
The Inspectors are convinced that merit should be the primary criteria in the selection of senior managers and that Member States are responsible for putting forward fully qualified candidates for the Secretary-General to consider.
Sometimes this will require casting their nets wider than otherwise may be the case and reaching out to their experts in the private sector.
The Inspectors believe that if recommendation 1 in paragraph 90 is implemented, it should ensure that a larger pool of candidates is correctly informed about the requirements for each vacancy.
Screening of candidates The Inspectors found through their interviews that Member States do not understand how interview panels are constituted nor how or when a decision is made to have an outside expert serve on a panel.
Further Member States wanted more clarity on the screening process so that they would understand how candidates are selected.
The Inspectors were informed that an interview panel (sometimes called a Senior Appointment Group), is put together by the Chef de Cabinet to assist the Secretary-General in the selection process.
The members of the panel are selected from among senior United Nations officials at the same level or higher as the position under recruitment.
The panel can comprise up to eight individuals.
The identity of panel members is kept confidential to protect the panellists from undue political pressures.
The Chef de Cabinet determines, based on the nature of the position, if there is a need to have an outside expert serving on the panel (for recruitment of the USG for UN Women, an outside panellist was invited).
The presence of an outside expert brings another perspective and, in certain instances, useful outside expertise, that helps in focusing and in narrowing down the best candidates for the opening.
For senior field appointments, the lead departments are delegated authority by the Secretary-General to convene interview panels.
Following the conduct of interviews, it is the lead department which submits the final short-list for the Secretary-General's consideration.
Interview panels are convened for each vacancy bearing in mind relevant background, geographical and gender balance.
The interview panel chooses from among the applications, a long-list of candidates to be interviewed.
After the interviews, the interview panel produces a shortlist of candidates, without ranking them, and this list is forwarded to the Secretary-General for selection.
e. OHRM or its equivalent screens candidates f. OHRM or its equivalent vets short-listed candidates before interview panel forwards the list to the Secretary-General The Inspectors see two problems in the process: (a) the interview panel members, who are the most senior officials in the organization, spend their time on basic screening of candidates, and (b) detailed reference checks are not performed, e.g., degrees, references, performance history etc. are not verified.
This is of major concern and should be corrected urgently as it can result in serious reputational risk for the organization.
In the Inspectors' opinion, if the guidelines in paragraph 87 (e) and (f) are followed, the interview panel would only deal with candidates who satisfy the requisite qualifications, candidates suggested to the Secretary-General would have their references checked and the selection and overall recruitment time should be reduced.
Shortlist of candidates In the interview with the Office of the Chef de Cabinet, the Inspectors were told that the primary consideration in hiring USGs/ASGs is merit-based, followed by gender and geographic balance, which are considered to be of equal importance.
The Member States want to know how large the pool of candidates for a position is and if their candidates were considered.
The Inspectors believe that once Member States submit their nominations, further feedback on individual candidates should be provided only to those candidates who made the long and/or short-list, not to the Member States, as the feedback will contain candidates' personal information.
The Inspectors were informed that the Secretary-General insists that the interview panel should submit to him a choice of at least three candidates for any position, at least one of whom is a woman.
If this is not the case, he will return the proposed list and ask for a new search.
He recognizes that on occasion, it has to be accepted that a female candidate cannot be found, but there must be a valid justification and the Secretary-General must be satisfied that a proper search effort was made.
The Inspectors recognize the Secretary-General as do Member States for his commitment to and success in increasing the number of women in higher echelons.
The Secretary-General does not have a set formula for geographical balance since most of the positions he is dealing with are not subject to geographical distribution in the true sense of the word (see annex I). He has available to him from OHRM, data on the geographical distribution of top echelon staff in the Organization and makes maximum effort to ensure that there is an equitable geographical balance.
While interview panels deal exclusively with one position, the Secretary-General more often than not is considering more than one position at a time.
For example, interview panel A may forward three candidates to the Secretary-General with interview panel B doing the same for another position.
Each of the two interview panels, while separate and distinct from each other, may have candidates from the same country.
Thus the Secretary-General's request to be provided with multiple candidates from diverse backgrounds is to ensure as best he can geographical and gender balance as well as to prevent being constrained in choice.
The Inspectors were informed that the Secretary-General consults with his senior advisers, including the Deputy Secretary-General in making his final decision.
The Secretary-General sees it as his responsibility to ensure that the right person is selected for the job.
To avoid undue pressure from Member States campaigning for their own candidate, he has decided to keep the short-list of candidates confidential.
This point can be argued, but the Inspectors agree with the decision of the Secretary-General.
Many individuals are interested to be considered only if their names are kept confidential.
On several occasions, good candidates were lost because of the possibility that official shortlists would be made public.
These individuals are of high calibre with high-profile jobs, often political.
Public humiliation from knowing that they were considered, but not selected for a position is a risk many are not willing to take.
Unfortunately there are times when names are published in the media but the names are obtained from the candidates themselves or different sources, but not from the EOSG.
g. Secretary-General shares interview panel's report detailing information as indicated in paragraph 88 f and g in consultations with Member States i. Interviewees are notified of the outcome of recruitment l. Secretary-General holds bi-annual briefings for Permanent Representatives While the Inspectors agree that the deliberations of interview panels and their recommendations to the Secretary-General should be confidential, they believe the interview panels should prepare a summary report, disclosing their terms of reference, how the interview panel was constituted, the number of members on the interview panel and their grade levels, and whether there were outside experts.
This information, coupled with the disclosure to Member States of the number, nationality and gender of long and short-listed candidates, would not jeopardize the confidentiality of the deliberative process of either the interview panels or the Secretary-General himself.
Furthermore, the Secretary-General should biannually brief Permanent Representatives on the senior appointments made in the preceding six months and should share with them, either orally or in written form, the information from the interview panels' summary reports.
The Inspectors believe, if the guidelines in paragraph 87 (g), (i), and (l) are followed, more light should be shed on the selection process, without compromising privacy.
Interviews and decision-making The Inspectors were told that the Secretary-General has made known his keen desire to interview the finalists.
However, by using the term "as appropriate" in the description (paragraph 40 (f)) the Secretary-General leaves open the possibility that he may not interview the finalists himself (see also paragraph 43 (g)).
Due to the heavy demands on the Secretary-General's schedule, he may choose to request one of his senior advisers (the supervising USG or the Chef de Cabinet) to interview on his behalf the short-list of the three candidates for a particular position.
In these situations, the Secretary-General may decide, after selection, to interact with the selected candidate prior to their reporting date.
Guideline, para.87: h. Uniform application of the process and equal treatment of candidates In the Inspectors' view, consistency has to prevail.
If any of the candidates are to be interviewed by the Secretary-General or any official, then all should be interviewed, be they internal or external candidates, to ensure their equal treatment.
Moreover, all interviews should be conducted by the same official whether this is the Secretary-General or his representative.
It is not fair to candidates that some are interviewed while others are not.
The Inspectors believe that if the guideline in paragraph 87 (h) is followed, the process should be more equitable.
Consultations Consultations with Member States are required for positions for which there are legislative stipulations mandating approval by the General Assembly or the Security Council upon nomination by the Secretary-General.
Such positions include the USG/UN Women, USG/OIOS, USG/UN-Habitat, USG/UNEP, USG/UNHCR, USG/OHCHR and ASG/PBSO, positions for which there are legislative stipulations mandating consultation with intergovernmental bodies e.g. USG/UNRWA, and positions of Special Representatives of the Secretary-General.
Consultations for SRSG positions involve a letter from the Secretary-General to the President of the Security Council by which he informs of his intention to appoint an SRSG.
The President of the Security Council brings the letter to the attention of the members of the Security Council and conveys their "no objection" to the Secretary-General in a letter by stating that the members of the Security Council took note of the Secretary-General's intention.
The Inspectors found that there is a discrepancy in interpreting the term "consultation" between the Secretary-General and certain Member States with respect to senior appointments.
Some Member States expressed concern that they are simply informed of the Secretary-General's decisions, whereas they interpret consultation in a broader sense as "agreement" or "consensual understanding".
The EOSG explained that the idea is not to ask for agreement, but to gauge reaction to determine possible difficulties with an appointment the Secretary-General is considering.
The Inspectors did not find a single document where the terms consultation vs. information are defined in the United Nations except for a note from the World Food Programme and the United Nations Office of Legal Affairs (UNOLA) to the Executive Board of the WFP.
The note indicated that the expression "in consultation with" and "after consultation with" in the practice of the United Nations is the process by which the views of the parties consulted are sought or ascertained and that it must be distinguished from "agreement", "concurrence" or "consent".
k. Secretary-General consults with Chairs/coordinators of regional groups a week prior to announcing the appointment The EOSG explained that there is an informal and formal process of consultations.
Once the Secretary-General has interviewed the finalists and taken a decision, he informally consults with the Chairs/coordinators of the regional groups of Member States, or relevant intergovernmental body, to "test" his selection of the candidate he intends to appoint.
The selection process is reportedly explained to Member States at this time, including the initial procedures, number of candidates, pre-screening criteria, interview process, and candidate selection, without disclosing the identities of the candidates.
These informal exchanges are followed by formal consultations when the final choice is confirmed.
In practice, however, the process is inconsistent, as on occasions, consultations are held with entire regional groups, and at other times, they are held with the Chairs/coordinators only.
In the Inspectors' opinion, if the guideline in paragraph 87 (k) is followed, the process should be clear, consistent, and uniform.
Political pressure and job reservations Some Member States suggested that their representatives should be invited to serve on interview panels for the selection of candidates for senior management positions.
Having Member States serve on the interview panels would put even more political pressure and possible roadblocks on the process and be chaotic in terms of which Member States would serve on which panels and why.
The Inspectors are of the opinion that while it is incumbent upon Member States to provide the best possible candidates, the Secretary-General, as the chief administrative officer of the Organization, is the one who must work with and trust his managers to fulfil his mandate.
At the end of the day, the Secretary-General is accountable to Member States for his choice.
The Inspectors were told during their interviews with the EOSG that the Secretary-General recognizes the political realities that he must reflect in the Organization, but that no position is reserved for any Member State.
In the event that the Secretary-General decides that a national of a certain country will be appointed, he insists that that country provide him a slate of candidates for consideration.
If he is not provided with a choice, he cannot select, and therefore, he will request new nominations.
The information presented in annex II, however, shows that historically, certain positions are reserved for certain Member States and that no Secretary-General has been immune to political pressure in this regard.
Using discretionary authority to broadly follow the process by arguing political realities and thereby excluding certain political appointments is tantamount to reserving jobs for Member States, which is exactly what the General Assembly has repeatedly cautioned against as stated in paragraph 15 (c) and (d) in this report.
The Inspectors believe that if the guidelines in paragraph 87 (b) and (c) are followed, the requirements of paragraph 3 (e) in resolution 46/232, whereby the General Assembly decided that as a general rule, no national of a Member State should succeed a national of that State in a senior post and that there should be no monopoly on senior posts by nationals of any State or group of States, should be satisfied.
Geographical rotation The issue of geographical rotation, which the Inspectors consider to be different from geographical distribution, arose frequently regarding the recent delayed appointment of the USG/OIOS, who serves for one fixed term of five years without the possibility of renewal.
The Inspectors wish to make clear at the outset that no one questions the qualifications of the new USG/OIOS which are exemplary, but rather many member states were troubled that the "North" succeeded the "North" in that position.
By General Assembly resolution 48/218 B, the appointment of the USG/OIOS is to be made with due regard to geographical rotation and in so doing the Secretary-General is to be guided by the provisions of paragraph 3 (e) of resolution 46/232.
During interviews with both Member States and Secretariat officials, it was clear that rotation meant the position would rotate between the "North" and the "South" with the North and the South being defined as developed and developing countries respectively.
The Inspectors were informed that although it is not written anywhere, there was and is an implicit understanding among all to this effect.
The appointment of the USG/OIOS from the North was not expected by Member States from the South as it was the South's turn to hold that position according to the common understanding of 48/218 B. There even seemed to have been an informal understanding that the candidate would come from Africa.
One of the leading finalists indeed was from Africa, the EOSG reported, but as the candidate withdrew, the Secretary-General was apparently left with a choice to start a new search all over again or appoint a candidate from the North as there were no other qualified candidates from the South.
d. Candidacies are sought from the region whose turn it is to hold the position The Inspectors find it inconceivable that there was a scarcity of qualified candidates from the South for this position.
This was not an unexpected vacancy: everyone agrees on how the concept of geographical rotation works, there is a resolution guiding the appointment, when the vacancy was coming up was known to all five years in advance, and clearly, it was known to all that the successor should be from the South.
The Inspectors believe that if the guidelines in paragraph 87 (b), (c), and (d) are followed, it should ensure that every effort is put in place to satisfy the requirements of paragraph 3 (e) in resolution 46/232 and be in accordance with the implicit understanding of the meaning of geographical rotation.
The selection and appointment of senior managers should comply with the provisions of the United Nations Charter, in particular Article 101, paragraph 3, and the relevant General Assembly resolutions as stated in paragraph 15 above.
The Inspectors believe that implementation of the following guidelines in tandem with the process outlined in the Secretary General's accountability report (para. 40 above) coupled with the establishment of a dedicated website designed to convey specific information as per paragraph 88 below should further enhance transparency in the selection and appointment process of senior managers.
(a) The recruitment process should be planned to allow for a minimum of two weeks of overlap between the two incumbents;
(b) Vacancy announcements should be issued for all positions except for special envoys and personal advisers as soon as it is known that a vacancy will arise, stipulating clearly defined responsibilities and specific qualifications/experience required in un-ambiguous terms;
(c) Notes verbale, transmitting vacancy announcements for every position should be sent to all Member States and all United Nations agencies, funds and programmes with at least one month notice;
(d) For those positions where the United Nations General Assembly has decided that there be geographic rotation (as per paragraph 45 above), between the "North" and the "South", candidacies should be sought only from the region whose turn it is to hold the position.
For example, assuming that a current incumbent is from the North and a successor should be from the South, notes verbale with the vacancy announcement requesting nominations of candidates for the upcoming vacancy should be sent to the Member States from the South only, with information to the Member States from the North;
(e) Basic screening to filter out candidates who do not satisfy mandatory eligibility criteria should be performed by OHRM or its equivalent.
Only candidates who satisfy the obligatory requirements as stated in the vacancy announcement should be forwarded for consideration of the interview panel;
(f) Once the interview panel has decided on a short list, that list should revert to OHRM or its equivalent for a thorough vetting of the references, performance record and information provided by the candidates.
Once completed, OHRM or its equivalent should return the short-list to the interview panel for forwarding to the Secretary-General for selection;
(g) At the conclusion of their work, the interview panel should prepare a summary report detailing the information as indicated in the website per paragraph 88 (f) and (g) below.
This report should be shared by the Secretary-General in his consultations with Member States;
(h) There should be a uniform application of the selection and appointment process.
Candidates are to be treated equally.
All short-listed candidates should be interviewed and all interviews should be performed by the same official, whether this is the Secretary-General himself or his representative;
(i) Long and short-listed candidates should be provided with feedback on their progress throughout the selection process if they so request; but in all cases interviewees should be notified of the outcome of the recruitment process.
No feedback should be provided to the Member States on the candidates they nominated.
Member States should be able to follow recruitment developments via periodic updates on a dedicated web-site as detailed in paragraph 88 below;
(j) If there are deviations from the selection and appointment process, the Secretary-General should fully disclose them in advance of the appointment or as soon as they need to occur;
(k) For appointments requiring consultations with Member States, at least a week prior to announcing the appointment, the Secretary-General should consult with the Chairs/coordinators of the regional groups of Member States.
Consultation in this regard means that the Secretary-General informs the Chairs/coordinators of his choice and that the Chairs/coordinators are given a week to register with the Secretary-General any concerns of their regional group.
It is the responsibility of the Member States to organize themselves within their regional groups to ensure that the Chairs/coordinators represent the views of the entire group;
(l) Bi-annual briefings should be held by the Secretary-General for Permanent Representatives on the selection process and appointments made in the preceding six months summarizing the information contained in the reports of interview panels as per the guideline in paragraph 87 (g) above.
Website The EOSG should set-up and maintain a dedicated website, which should be updated at least monthly to convey specific information on senior appointments of USGs and ASGs to Member States and potential candidates.
The website should contain information as recommended below.
Information in points (c) to (h) should be available to the public, while access to information in points (a) and (b) should be restricted to the Permanent Missions:
(a) A listing of all current appointments at USG and ASG levels, other than special envoys and personal advisers, containing information similar in content and presentation to that in annex I. This will allow Member States advance planning to find the best qualified candidates;
(b) A separate listing of upcoming vacancies of USG and ASG positions, other than special envoys and personal advisers, over a two month period.
This listing should be based solely on the date of expiry of each appointment regardless of the individuals' or Secretary-General's intentions to extend or discontinue their contract;
(c) The vacancy announcement for each vacancy should be published on the website as soon as it is clear that a vacancy will arise;
(d) An indication of intent to advertise in the print media as well as an indication of the need for input from civil society so as to cast the net more widely;
(e) An indication of the expected time-line for each vacancy specifying the date by which:
(i) All applications need to be received;
(ii) Candidates selected for interviews will be contacted;
(iii) Interviewed candidates will be informed of the results of the recruitment process;
(iv) Consultations are expected to be conducted and the final selection announced;
(v) The new incumbent is expected to report for duty;
(f) Disclosure of the terms of reference for interview panels established for each vacancy with an explanation of how the interview panel was constituted, how many members served on the interview panel, what were their grades, and whether other agencies/entities and/or external experts were invited to sit on the interview panel and why;
(g) Disclosure of the number of candidates who applied for each vacancy, nationalities and gender of the candidates interviewed by the interview panel (the long list) and also of the candidates on the short-list recommended by the interview panel to the Secretary-General; and,
(h) The statement announcing the final choice of candidate.
Implementation of the following recommendations should result in enhanced accountability and transparency in the selection and appointment of senior managers in the United Nations Secretariat.
The General Assembly should direct the Executive Office of the Secretary-General to set-up and maintain on a monthly basis a dedicated website which will convey specific information on senior appointments to Member States and potential candidates as described in paragraph 88 of this report.
The General Assembly should endorse the guidelines in paragraph 87 (a) to (l) of this report and direct the Secretary-General to follow the guidelines in selecting and appointing senior managers in tandem with the process outlined in the Secretary-General's accountability report (A/64/640).
Department/Entity Name Function Classification Rank Female Male Country of Nationality Date Appointed Contractual Status Duration of Appointment According to Regulation 4.5 (a), United Nations Staff Rules and Regulations, ST/SGB/2010/6, the appointment of Under-Secretaries-General and Assistant Secretaries-General is normally for a period of up to five years, subject to prolongations or renewal.
Contracts are most commonly issued on a yearly basis Funding Source Subject to Geographical Distribution Position Vacant Alliance of Civilizations Jorge Sampaio High Representative Representative M
No Border Controversy between Guyana and Venezuela Norman Girvan Personal Representative Jamaica
Border dispute between Equatorial Guinea and Gabon Nicolas Michel Special Adviser and Mediator Adviser Switzerland
Compliance by Iraq with its obligations regarding Kuwait Gennady P. Tarasov Secretary-General's High-level Coordinator Coordinator Russia
Cyprus Alexander Downer Special Adviser Australia
Sha Zukang USG for Economic and Social Affairs Head China
Yes Susana Malcorra USG for Field Support F
Shaaban Muhammad Shaaban USG for General Assembly Affairs and Conference Management Egypt
Angela Kane USG for Management Germany
B. Lynn Pascoe USG for Political Affairs Kiyotaka Akasaka USG for Communication and Public Information Japan
Alain Le Roy USG for Peacekeeping Operations France
Gregory B. Starr USG for Safety and Security
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific Noeleen Heyzer Executive Secretary Singapore
Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia Rima Khalaf Jordan
Economic Commission for Africa Abdoulie Janneh Gambia
Economic Commission for Europe Jan Kubis Slovakia
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean Alicia Barcena Mexico
Vijay K. Nambiar Chef de Cabinet India
Greece-FYROM Talks Matthew Nimetz Personal Envoy Envoy
Haiti Paul Farmer Deputy Special Envoy
William J. Clinton Special Envoy
HIV/AIDS in Asia Nafis Sadik Pakistan
HIV/AIDS in Eastern Europe Vacant Implementation of Security Council resolution 1559/2004
Innovative Finance for Development Philippe Douste-Blazy Internet Governance Nitin Desai Adviser of the Secretary-General
Issue of Human Rights and Transnational Corporations and other Business Enterprises John Ruggie
Joint African Union - United Nations Mediation Support Team (JMST)
Djibril Yipene Bassole Chief Mediator Mediator Burkina Faso
Migration Peter Sutherland Ireland
Millennium Development Goals Jeffrey Sachs Senior Adviser
Edmond Mulet Guatemala Roger A. Meece
Valerie Amos USG for Humanitarian Affairs, Emergency Relief Coordinator
Office for Disarmament Affairs Sergio de Queiroz Duarte Brazil
Navanethem Pillay High Commissioner South Africa
Cheick Sidi Diarra Special Adviser on Africa and High Representative for LLS
Carman Louise Lapointe USG for Oversight Services Canada
Patricia O'Brien USG for Legal Affairs
Radhika Coomaraswamy Sri Lanka
Rauf Engin Soysal Turkey
Prevention of Genocide Francis Deng Special Adviser to the Secretary-General Sudan
Sexual Violence in Conflict Margot Wallstrom Sweden
Special Adviser on Human Security Yukio Takasu
Iqbal Riza Joseph V. Reed Sport for Development and Peace Wilfried Lemke
Tuberculosis UN Habitat Joan Clos Executive Director Spain
Staffan de Mistura Ad Melkert Netherlands
Ibrahim Gambari Joint Special Representative Nigeria
Supachai Panitchpakdi Secretary-General Thailand
Antonio Manuel de Oliveira Guterres
Ellen Margrethe Loj Denmark
Haile Menkerios Ameerah Haq Bangladesh
Achim Steiner Director-General of UNON and Executive Director of UNEP
Yuri Fedotov Director-General of UNOV and Executive Director of UNODC
Robert H. Serry Special Coordinator/PRSG
Charles Petrie Executive Representative/RC/RR/HC and Designated Official
Karin Landgren Special Representative and Head of the United Nations Office in Burundi Announced on 31-Dec-10
Michael Peter Floyd Smith
Thomas Stelzer ASG for Policy Coordination and Inter-agency Affairs Austria
Kwame S. Jomo ASG for Economic Affairs Malaysia Rachel N. Mayanja Special Adviser on Gender Issues and Advancement of Women Uganda
Anthony Banbury ASG for Field Support
Franz Baumann ASG for General Assembly Affairs and Conference Management
Warren Edward Sach ASG for Central Support Services
Catherine Pollard ASG for HR Management Guyana
Jun Yamazaki Controller Taye Brook Zerihoun ASG for Political Affairs
Babacar Gaye Military Adviser Senegal
Atul Khare ASG for Peacekeeping Operations Dimitry Titov ASG for Rule of Law and Security Institutions
Kim Won-Soo Deputy Chef de Cabinet Robert C. Orr ASG for Policy Planning
HIV/AIDS in Africa Elizabeth Mataka Botswana
HIV/AIDS in the Caribbean Region George Alleyne Barbados
Human Rights for Internally Displaced Persons Walter Kalin
Choi Soon-hong Chief Information Technology Officer
Implementation of the International Strategy for Disaster Reduction Margareta Wahlstrom
Azouz Ennifar Deputy Chief Mediator
Joint Incident Prevention and Response Mechanism and the international discussions in Geneva on security and stability and the return of internally displaced persons and refugees Antti Turunen UN Representative Finland
Chander Prakash Wadhwa Force Commander
Fidele Sarassoro Cote d'Ivoire
Catherine Bragg ASG for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator
Ivan Simonovic ASG for Human Rights, New York Croatia
Thomas Alexander Aleinikoff Deputy High Commissioner for Human Rights, Geneva
Kang Kyung-wha D. Stephen Mathias ASG for Legal Affairs
Judy Cheng-Hopkins ASG for Peacebuilding Support
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia Miroslav Jenca SRSG and Head Senior UN System Coordinator for Avian and Human Influenza David Nabarro
Inga Bjork-Klevby Deputy Executive Director
Mohamed Yonis Deputy Joint AU-UN Special Representative for Operations and Management Somalia Patrick Nyamvumba Rwanda
Deputy Joint AU-UN Special Representative Petko Draganov Bulgaria
Natalio C. Ecarma III
Head of Mission/Force Commander Philippines
T. Alexander Aleinikoff Deputy High Commissioner
Michael von der Schulenburg Executive Representative
United Nations International School Silvia Fuhrman
United Nations Office to the African Union in Addis Ababa Zachary Muburi-Muita Head of Office Kenya
Henrietta Joy Abena Nyarko Mensa-Bonsu Ghana
Abou Moussa Principal DSRSG
Chad Deputy Director-General Joseph Mutaboba
Angela Cropper Deputy Executive Director of UNEP
Margot Ellis Deputy Commissioner-General Maxwell Gaylard Deputy Special Coordinator/RC/HC
Robert Mood Chief of Staff and Head of Mission
Violence Against Children Marta Santos Pais Summary Total Appointments announced Funded from regular budget (RB)
Posts subject to geographical distribution Annex II
Department Year Country Gender USG:
2007-current Mark Malloch Brown Lakhdar Brahimi Maurice Strong Martin Lees Nafis I. Sadik Mohamed Sahnoun Diego Cordovez Ecuador Jamsheed K.A. Marker Louise Frechette Chinmaya R. Gharekhan Joseph Verner Reed Virendra Dayal Rafeeuddin Ahmed Chakravarthi V. Narasmihan Andrew W. Cordier ASG: Alicea Barcena Ibarra
2004-current Elisabeth Lindenmayer Patricia M. Durrant Diego Arria Venezuela Michael Doyle Miles Stoby Gillian M. Sorensen Rosario Green Benita Ferrero-Waldner Alvaro de Soto Peru Jean-Claude Aime Aly I. Teymour
2009-current Jane Hall Lute Jean-Marie Guehenno Bernard Miyet Kofi A. Annan Marrack I. Goulding
2010-current Chikadibia Obiakor Dmitry Titov Russian Federation Michael A. Sheehan Hedi Annabi Manfred Eisele Ismat Kittani Iraq Department of Political Affairs and predecessors Ibrahim A. Gambari Kieran Prendergast Mahmoud Mestiri Vladimir Petrovsky James O.C. Jonah Sierra Leone Ronald I. Spiers Vasiliy S. Safronchuk Viacheslav A. Ustinov Abdulrahim Abby Farah Issoufou Saidou Djermakoye Niger Javier Perez de Cuellar Mikhail D. Sytenko William B. Buffum Brian E. Urquhart Arkady N. Shevchenko Tang Ming-chao Bradford Morse Roberto E. Guyer Leonid N. Kutakov Jose Rolz-Bennett Alexei E. Nesterenko Godfrey K. J. Amachree Vladimir P. Suslov Omar Loutfi United Arab Republic Evgeny D. Kiselyv Georgy P. Arkadev Anatoly F. Dobrynin Humphrey Trevelyan Dragoslav Protitch Yugoslavia Ralph Bunche Benjamin A. Cohen Ilya S. Tchernychev Victor Hoo Constantin E. Zinchenko Taye-Brook Zerihoun Eritrea Javier Ruperez Tulaimeni Kalomoh Namibia Danilo Turk Slovenia Ibrahima Fall G.B. Schlittler-Silva Lansana Kouyate Guinea Benon Vahe Sevan Giandomenico Picco Sotirios Mousouris Greece Iqbal A. Akhund Najmuddine S. Rifai Syria Robert Muller George L. Sherry Fou-Tchin Liu Enuga Reddy M'Hamed Essaafi Ilter Turkmen Gordon K. Goundrey Arkady Sobolev
2009- current David Veness Department of Economic and Social Affairs and predecessors
2007- current Jose Antonio Ocampo Colombia Jin Yongjian Jean-Claude Milleron Ji Chaozhu Antoine Blanca Xie Qimei Shuaib Uthman Yolah Bi Jilong Jean Louis Ripert K.K.S. Dadzie Gabriel Van Laetham Philippe de Seynes
2005-current Jomo Kwame Sundaram Rachel Mayanja Patrizio M. Civili Angela E.V. King Meredith Alister McIntyre Grenada Tamar Oppenheimer Goran P. Ohlin Luis Maria Gomez Vladimir S. Pozharski Enrique ter Horst Leticia R. Shahani Margaret Joan Anstee Peter Hansen P.N. Dhar Helvi Sipila Guillaume Georges-Picot David K. Owen Henri Laugier Department of General Assembly Affairs and Conference Services and predecessors Chen Jian Yongjian Jin Eugeniusz Wyzner Bohdan Lewandowski Giri Nosek Czechoslovakia Yohannes Mengesha Federico Riesco-Quintana Shamaldharee Lall Adriannus Adrian Pelt
2008- current Alicia Barcena Ibarra Christopher Bancroft Burnham Catherine Bertini Joseph E. Connor Melissa Wells Dick Thornburgh J. Richard Foran Martii Ahtisaari Patricio Ruedas Helmut F. Debatin George F. Davidson Horatio Keith Matthews Andrew A. Stark Department of Administrative and Financial Services was discontinued Byron Price DM/Capital Master Plan Louis Frederick Reuter IV
Toshiyuki Niwa DM/Office of Central Support Services Warren Sach Andrew Toh Carole R. Thompson Francoise Cestac Alice Weil Clayton C. Timbrell Robert J. Ryan David B. Vaughn Byron F. Wood John B. Hutson DM/Office of Human Resources Management Jan Beagle New Zealand Rosemary McCreery Rafiah Salim Dennis J. Halliday Christine Dodson Armando Duque Gonzalez Abdou Ciss Mercedes Pulido de Briceno Louis-Pascal Negre Leila H. Doss Mohamed Habib Gherab Alexander MacFarquhar W. A. B. Hamilton John McDiarmid J. A. C. Robertson DM/Office of Programme Planning, Budget and Accounts Jean-Pierre Halbwachs Mauritius Wilbur H. Ziehl Bruce R. Turner H. C. Andersen Iceland Shashi Tharoor Kensaku Hogen Therese Paquet-Sevigny Yasushi Akashi Hernane Tavares de Sa Ahmed S. Bokhari Samir Sanbar Lebanon Marco Vianello-Chiodo Genichi Akatani Agha Abdul Hamid Kim Hak-Su Adrianus Mooy Indonesia Seiko Takahashi S.A.M.S. Kibria J.B.P. Maramis U Nyun Myanmar P.S. Lokanathan Bader Al-Dafa Qatar Mervat Tallawy Hazem El-Beblawi Sabbaheddin Bakjaji Tayseer Abdel Jaber Mohammad Said Al-Nabulsi Mohammad Said Al-Attar Yemen Kingsley Amoako Layashi Yaker Issa Diallo Guniea Adebayo Adedeji Robert K.A. Gardiner Mekki Abbas Marek Belka Brigita Schmognerova Danuta Hubner Yves Berthelot Gerald Hinteregger Klaus Sahlgren Janez Stanovnik Vladimir Velebit Sakari Tuomioja Gunnar Myrdal Jose Luis Machinea Gert Rosenthal Norberto Gonzalez Enrique V. Iglesias Uruguay Carlos Quintana Jose Antonio Mayobre Raul Prebisch Gustavo Martinez Cabanas Nobuaki Tanaka Nobuyasu Abe Jayantha Dhanapala Prvoslav Davinic Jan Martenson Rolf G. Bjornerstedt Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and predecessors
2010- Current John Holmes Jan Egland Kenzo Oshima Sergio Vieira de Mello Jan K. Eliasson Faruk N. Berkol Carolyn McAskie Gualtiero Fulcheri Office of Information and Communication Technology Choi Soon-Hong Office of Internal Oversight Services and predecessors Carman Lapointe Inga-Britt Ahlenius Dileep Nair Karl Theodor Paschke Mohamed Aly Niazi Office of Legal Affairs Hans Axel Valdemar Corell Carl-August Fleischhauer Eric Suy Belgium Constantin A. Stavropoulos Stephen Mathias Peter Taksoe-Jensen Larry Johnson Robin Vincent Ralph Zacklin Ivan S. Kerno Abraham F. Feller Louise Arbour Bertrand Ramcharan Mary Robinson Jose Ayala Lasso Mehr Khan Williams Anwarul Karim Chowdhury Office of the Iraq Programme (Oil for Food: 1997-2004)
Yuli Vorontsov Ramiro Lopes da Silva Tun Myat Hans von Sponeck Rubens Ricupero Kenneth K.S. Dadzie Gamani Corea Manuel Perez-Guerrero
2006-current Carlos Fortin Cabezas Johannes Pronk Bernard T. Chidzero Zimbabwe Rhodesia Stein Rossen Rudolphus Lubbers Sadako Ogata Thorvald Stoltenberg Jean-Pierre Hocke Poul Hartling Sadruddin Aga Khan Iran Felix Schnyder Auguste R. Lindt Gerrit Jan van Heuven Goedhart L. Craig Johnstone Wendy Chamberlin Mary Ann Wyrsch Frederick Barton Gerald Walzer Martin Douglas Stafford Arthur Eugene Dewey William Richard Smyser Dale S. De Haan United Nations Office at Geneva
2002-current Miljan Komatina Mowaffak Allaf Syrian Rikhi Jaipal Luigi Cottafavi Vittorio Winspeare-Guicciardi Pier P. Spinelli Arthur Rucker J. Franklin Ray Wlodzimierz Moderow United Nations Office at Nairobi / UN Habitat Anna Tibaijuka Klaus Toepfer Elizabeth Dowdeswell Arcot Ramachandran Mostafa Kamal Tolba Hamdallah Zedan Shafqat S. Kakakhel Reuben James Olembo Darshan Johal Wally N'Dow Anthony T. Brough Sveneld Evteev William H. Mansfield III
Sumihiro Kuyama Joseph Wheeler Genady N. Golubev Rudolph Schmidt Peter Shaw Thacher Horst Peter Oltmanns Cesar Quintana David A. Munro Richard B. Stedman Robert A. Frosch United Nations Office at Vienna Antonio Maria Costa Giuseppe Pino Arlacchi Giorgio Giacomelli Charles Bourbonniere Giuseppe di Gennaro Bror A. Rexed Jacobus De Beus United Nations Ombudsman United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East Karen AbuZayd Olof Rydbeck Thomas W. McElhiney John Shaw Rennie Laurence Michelmore John H. Davis Leslie J. Carver Henry R. Labouisse John B. Blandford Howard Kennedy Mohamed Abdelmoumene Luce Daniele Biolato William L. Eagleton Robert S. Dillon As this is a report on possible measures to further enhance transparency in the selection and appointment process of senior managers, the Inspectors were surprised that the United Nations Secretariat comments were designated as "confidential", a classification the Inspectors understand to mean that they are not to be made public.
The Inspectors believe this does not comport with the notion of transparency, be it transparency in the preparation of this particular report or transparency in the appointment and selection process of senior managers.
Moreover, the Inspectors could find nothing in the "confidential" comments that would warrant such a classification nor could they find a compelling or convincing rationale for this designation as it pertains to this report in the Secretary-General's bulletin on "Information sensitivity, classification and handling" (ST/SGB/2007/6).
Nevertheless, due to the "confidential" marking of the comments, and in accordance with article 6(3) of the JIU Statute, the Inspectors did not feel they were in a position to share the Secretariat's comments without their consent; Member States, if they so wish, are free to request the United Nations to "declassify" them.
Accordingly, neither those comments nor the Inspectors' analysis on them have been included in this annex.
The Inspectors did make a number of clarifications and changes in the text at the suggestion of the Secretariat, for which they are grateful.
But most suggested changes to the guidelines and website have not been accommodated as they simply eviscerate the entire report.
Major transparency initiatives and website content are asked to be removed, or are deemed impracticable, either because the Secretariat feels they breach confidentiality of the process or impinge on the Secretary-General's discretionary authority.
The Inspectors believe to do so would take the Secretariat back to square one and maintain the status quo.
Throughout the Secretariat's comments, concerns are expressed about the need for confidentiality of the process, writ large, which is in contrast with the objectives of this report.
The Inspectors believe the challenge is to strike a balance between providing enough information to Member States so they are confident that the process is open, fair and transparent without compromising the privacy of the candidates or jeopardizing the confidentiality of the deliberative processes of either the interview panels or the Secretary-General himself.
The Inspectors believe this balance has been struck with their suggested guidelines and website.
A careful reading of the recommended guidelines and website content makes clear that there should be no compromise to the integrity or effectiveness of the Secretary-General's deliberations.
The Inspectors were careful to ensure the privacy of the candidates while making the overall process more transparent to Member States and to the candidates themselves.
The Inspectors do not believe and do not agree that the contents of either of the two recommendations in any way breach the Secretary-General's discretionary authority, nor are there any confidentiality issues involved.
As explained in the report in paragraphs 46 to 48, the Secretary-General has the discretionary authority to select and appoint whomever he wishes.
But, the Secretary-General should not have carte blanche to avoid the process he himself has created.
That process, set out in the Secretary-General's accountability report (A/64/640), is in place, but opaque.
The Inspectors accept that any process, be it for Headquarters-based, field-based, or other senior positions, is and will be fraught with political volatility, but that cannot be used as an excuse to bypass transparency in the selection and appointment process of these individuals.
The Inspectors believe the suggested guidelines and website information should obviate any concerns in this regard and invite Member States to accept, reject or modify the recommendations in this report as appropriate.
Annex IV: Overview of action to be taken by participating organizations on JIU recommendations Intended impact United Nations*
Report For action For information a
Legend: L: Recommendation for decision by legislative organ
: Recommendation does not require action by this organization Intended impact: a: enhanced accountability b: dissemination of best practices c: enhanced coordination and cooperation d: enhanced controls and compliance e: enhanced effectiveness f: significant financial savings g: enhanced efficiency o: other
* Covers all entities listed in ST/SGB/2002/11 other than UNCTAD, UNODC, UNEP, UN-HABITAT, UNHCR, UNRWA.
