Sheep are not stupid, and they are nor helpless either
Reputation: Sheep are stupid, defenceless and harmless creatures that mope about on hillsides doing not very much.
They are good for two things: being eaten and producing wool.
Reality: Sheep are actually surprisingly intelligent, with impressive memory and recognition skills.
They build friendships, stick up for one another in fights, and feel sad when their friends are sent to slaughter.
They are also one of the most destructive creatures on the planet.
Intelligent.
Complex.
Sociable.
All words we would quickly assign to humans, but would not dream of extending to sheep, those fluffy white creatures you see milling about in fields – or served up with mint sauce on your dinner plate.
Instead, we have decreed that sheep ( Ovis aries ) are just plain stupid.
This opinion has not changed much since the 1700s, when George Washington, one of the Founding Fathers of the United States of America, declared: "If the freedom of speech is taken away then dumb and silent we may be led, like sheep to the slaughter."
Nowadays, to be "a sheep" is to be someone who mindlessly follows others: "a waste of flesh and brain cells," as Urban Dictionary puts it .
A 2001 study by Keith Kendrick , who is now at the University of Electronic Science and Technology in China, found that they can recognise and remember at least 50 individual faces for more than 2 years.
Sheep also have erotic preferences: 8% are homosexual
At the time Kendrick told BBC News : "The way the sheep's brain is organised suggests they must have some kind of emotional response to what they see in the world."
Caroline Lee of the CSIRO in Australia has also studied sheep intelligence.
The enticing sight of their fellow sheep friends awaiting them at the finish helped them reach the exit.
Aside from being smart, sheep can be playful and joyful.
Sheep also have erotic preferences: 8% are homosexual , making them one of the few species that show lifelong preferences for same-sex partners.
Over two decades ago, researchers from the University of California observed rams for three years and discovered that they established firm friendships and looked out for one another in times of need: "Rams were found to form long term relationships… [they] intervened on behalf of weaker colleagues and supported each other in fights," says the 1993 study .
They were domesticated between 11000 and 9000 BC for the use of their woollen fleece, meat and milk
These acts of loyalty and friendship-building are driven by emotions.
A 2009 report published in Animal Welfare found that sheep are capable of experiencing a whole range of feelings, from fear to anger, despair, boredom and happiness.
"[As with humans], despair is triggered by situations which are evaluated as sudden, unfamiliar, unpredictable… and uncontrollable, whereas boredom results from an overly predictable environment," write the authors.
A study published in September 2016 shows that the populations of wild animals in Kenya fell by 68% between 1977 and 2016.
The effects of drought are much more extreme now "Aerial monitoring from the government of Kenya shows that sheep numbers have gone up dramatically in the last 40 years," says lead author Joseph Ogutu of the University of Hohenheim in Stuggart, Germany.
"Sheep graze grass very low to the ground, and in their huge numbers they decimate the grasslands.
This is terrible because most wild animals [like elephants, buffalo and zebra] need taller grasses to eat."
In the Maasai Mara National Reserve , Ogutu says the buffalo population was nearly 13,000 in 1992, but has since sharply decreased.
"During the drought, they were pushed out of feeding areas by sheep and other cattle, and the buffalo population crashed by 76% in one year.
They&apos;ve never recovered."
Drought is not uncommon in Kenya, but the issue now is the number of animals, both wild and domesticated, trying to survive it. "The effects of drought are much more extreme now that there are so many sheep competing with wild animals for the same resources," says Ogutu.
Ogutu and his colleagues are calling on the Kenyan government to limit the number of sheep and other livestock, to prevent large wild animals going extinct.
But what is happening in Kenya is a microcosm for a global story.
The demand for livestock products is still rising, putting pressure on the environment. A 2006 report by the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation explains why: "Extensive grazing occupies and degrades vast areas of land… the livestock sector enters into more and direct competition for scarce land, water and other natural resources… in all, livestock production accounts for 70 percent of all agricultural land and 30 percent of the land surface of the planet."
In their huge numbers, sheep are hugely destructive creatures.
Our use of them is contributing to the destruction of forests and to climate change, and causing a shortage of fresh water.
Of course, it is hardly the fault of the sheep.
But somehow they do not seem quite so dumb and cuddly any more.
