The advert was plugging what it called “citizenship by investment.”
I’d heard of citizenship-for-sale initiatives in the past, and – prompted by the ad – I briefly wondered whether a second citizenship beyond my American one was something I might need.
Is this something that people other than the uber rich are considering, and for reasons other than tax optimisation? And if so, why?
As more countries tighten their borders and paths to immigration, a new industry is working to bypass those restrictions – for a hefty fee.
Investment citizenship programmes are not new.
They’ve been around for decades, primarily as a way for countries to boost their incomes.
Canada and the Caribbean island of St Kitts and Nevis started theirs in the 1980s and the US and UK began similar ones in the 1990s.
The specifics of different investment citizenship programmes vary by country.
They allow foreigners to invest in real-estate projects and businesses, buy property, or to donate money directly to a country’s government in exchange for a visa or passport.
St. Kitts and Nevis launched its initiative in 1984, one year after the fledgling country claimed independence from the UK.
The aim was to get more money flowing in from entrepreneurs who saw value in tropical beaches and low taxes.
It only attracted a few hundred participants in the beginning.
But, by 2009, backed by a marketing campaign, passport holders of the island nation were given visa-free access to the 26 Schengen area countries and demand increased rapidly.
London-based CS Global Partners, the consultancy firm that made the inflight-magazine advert I read, shepherds investors through the legal process of procuring a passport through investment. The firm says interest in their services has grown fourfold in the past year.
“We are definitely seeing big shifts,” says CEO Micha Emmett. “The traditional market still exists – very much so – but we’ve seen [people from] countries that were never interested in second citizenship by investment options before now coming online making inquiries.
For example, we saw a 400% increase in enquiries from Turkey in March.”
But increasingly, richer countries are offering &apos;citizenship for a price&apos;.
Comparable programmes in New Zealand cost NZ$1.5m ($1.06m) – a popular move among Silicon Valley’s tech elite recently – or £2m ($2.58m) for the UK and $500,000 for the US.
At last count, 23 countries from Cyprus to Singapore offered some kind of investment residency or citizenship scheme and more are being created with similar programmes proliferating across Europe.
Almost half of all EU member states now offer some form of investment residency or citizenship programmes.
For as little as $50,000 (in Latvia) or as much as $10 million (in France), foreigners can buy legal status to live, work and bank in a number of countries.
Perhaps more importantly, by extension, they buy access to visa-free travel to countries around the world.
And, there’s an informal rating system for the most sought after passports.
So I think at the moment the data out there is that on the German passport you can travel to more countries than with any other citizenship in the world.” Emmett says.
In a globalised world where political isolationism is paradoxically on the rise, this freedom of movement is an attractive element of such schemes.
Andrew Henderson, an American entrepreneur and founder of the Nomad Capitalist , a blog, podcast and consulting company, has four passports and is working on his fifth.
Multiple citizenships provide him with a multitude of entrepreneurial options, he says.
“I think the world is going more nomadic.
People don’t want to be in once place.
They want to have one or two or three bases for lifestyle reasons and pay reasonable taxes, and that’s what becoming more accessible.
Most of our clients do not go and live in the country they invest in. They see it as more of an insurance policy While not everyone with multiple citizenships will reside in multiple nations, Williams says the industry can be viewed as a barometer of turmoil in the world.
Earlier this year in the US, two senators, Dianne Feinstein and Chuck Grassley, introduced a bill to get rid of the EB-5 programme, arguing that it is too flawed to continue.
Indeed, the intersection of large sums of money and international real estate deals is ripe for fraud.
The St. Kitts and Nevis programme ran into trouble with the US Treasury Department when suspected Iranian operatives were caught using their St. Kitts passports to launder money for banks in Tehran in violation of US Sanctions.
