The Truth About Chiropractic Therapy
'. . . at the heart of science is an essential balance between two seemingly contradictory attitudes - an openness to new ideas, no matter how bizarre or counterintuitive, and the most ruthlessly sceptical scrutiny of all ideas, old and new. This is how deep truths are winnowed from deep nonsense.'
Carl Sagan
Chiropractic Therapy
A form of treatment developed at the end of the nineteenth century, which involves manual adjustments of the spine. Although some chiropractors focus on treating back pain, many others also treat a whole range of common illnesses, such as asthma. The underlying theory claims that manipulating the spine is medically beneficial because it can influence the rest of the body via the nervous system.
CHIROPRACTORS, WHO USUALLY DEAL WITH BACK OR NECK PROBLEMS BY manipulating the spine, are becoming such an established part of the healthcare system that many readers will be surprised to see chiropractic therapy included in a book about alternative medicine. After all, many conventional doctors refer their patients to chiropractors, and many insurance plans are willing to cover such treatments. This is particularly true in America, where chiropractors are most widespread, and where roughly $3 billion is spent annually on chiropractic treatment. As well as being an established part of the American healthcare system, chiropractors are becoming increasingly popular - between 1970 and 1990 their numbers tripled, and in 2002 there were 60,000 chiropractors practising in North America. It is expected that this figure will almost double by 2010, whereas the number of medical physicians will have increased by only 16 per cent.
Perhaps the most significant indication that chiropractors have become part of the medical mainstream is that they are licensed in all fifty US states, and they also have legal recognition in many other countries. For example, chiropractors in the United Kingdom are regulated by statute, which means that they have a similar standing to that of doctors and nurses. So, bearing all this in mind, why do chiropractors deserve to be labelled as alternative therapists?
The chiropractic approach to medicine emerged towards the end of the nineteenth century with a radically new view on health. The founders of chiropractic therapy argued that poor health was due to subluxations, by which they meant slight misalignments of the vertebrae in the spine. In turn, they believed that subluxations interfered with the flow of so-called innate intelligence (akin to a life force or vital energy), which then led to health problems of all sorts. But there is no evidence for the existence of innate intelligence or its role in health. The concepts of innate intelligence and subluxations are as mystical and as baffling as the concepts of Ch'i in acupuncture or extreme dilution in homeopathy, which means it makes no sense at all from a modern scientific point of view. That is why chiropractic treatment is still considered by many as an alternative medicine -despite its current popularity.
But, if we temporarily suspend disbelief and leave the underlying philosophy to one side, the key question is straightforward: does chiropractic therapy help patients? Fortunately, this is a question that has been addressed thanks to evidence-based medicine and the use of clinical trials.
So far, evidence-based medicine has generated a pessimistic view of alternative medicine. Acupuncturists and homeopaths have spent centuries developing treatments to help patients, and yet scientists have examined the evidence, mainly from clinical trials, and concluded that these therapies are over-hyped. Acupuncture appears to be nothing more than a placebo for everything except some types of pain and nausea, and the jury is out even for these conditions. Worse still, homeopathic remedies have failed to be more effective than placebos in the treatment of every known condition.
Some readers may start to suspect that evidence-based medicine is somehow biased against alternative medicine. Perhaps acupuncture and homeopathy are actually valid therapies, and instead maybe it is in fact the clinical trial that is at fault? Perhaps the clinical trial is part of an establishment conspiracy cooked up by doctors and scientists to protect themselves from the interference of meddling outsiders? Just in case you are harbouring any such suspicions, let us take another look at the clinical trial and evidence-based medicine in general before examining the evidence for and against chiropractic therapy.
Evidence-based tea The core principle of the trial is simple and can be traced back as far as the thirteenth century, when the Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II conducted an experiment to find out the effects of exercise on digestion. Two knights consumed identical meals, and then one went hunting while the other rested in bed. Several hours later, both knights were killed and the contents of their alimentary canals were examined. This revealed that digestion had progressed further in the sleeping knight. It was crucial to have two knights undergoing different levels of exercise, active and at rest, as it allowed the degree of digestion in one to be compared against the other. The key point of a trial is to compare the consequences of two or more situations.
The modern clinical trial, as developed by James Lind to test cures for scurvy in the eighteenth century, is less brutal than Frederick II's trial, but the central idea is the same. If, for example, a novel treatment is to be tested, then it needs to be compared against something else, known as the control. That is why the novel treatment is given to one group of patients and the control is given to another group. The control can be an established treatment, or a placebo or anything at all. Afterwards the patients in both groups are assessed, so that the effect of the novel treatment can be compared against the control.
Sir Ron Fisher, a British pioneer of the use of trials in the twentieth century, used to recount a story that amply demonstrated the simplicity and power of the trial. While at Cambridge, he became embroiled in an argument over how to make the ideal cup of tea. A woman insisted that it tasted worse if milk was added to the tea as compared to when tea was added to the milk, but the scientists around the table argued that it made no difference at all. Fisher immediately proposed a trial - in this case the comparison was the taste of milk added to tea versus the taste of tea added to milk.
Several cups were made with milk added to the tea, and several with tea added to the milk, and the woman was challenged to identify which was which. Although the cups of tea were prepared in secret and were identical in all other ways, the woman could indeed correctly recognize in each case whether the tea had been added to the milk or vice versa. The trial had shown that there was a difference, that the woman was right and that the scientists were wrong. In fact, there is a good scientific reason why the two forms of tea should taste different. Milk added to tea leads to a less satisfying cup, because the milk becomes superheated and this causes proteins in the milk to deteriorate - these proteins then taste slightly sour.
Fisher used this simple example as the basis for an entire book on scientific testing, The Design of Experiments, which went into great detail about the subtleties of trials.
Despite its sheer simplicity and powerful ability to get to the truth, some alternative therapists argue that the clinical trial is a harsh test, which is somehow biased against their treatments. But that sort of attitude betrays a skewed understanding of the clinical trial, which merely seeks to establish the truth, regardless of the type of treatment being examined. In fact, the clinical trial provides a wholly unbiased and truly fair test of any medical treatment, either conventional or alternative. The unbiased nature of the clinical trial is demonstrated by the fact that the history of mainstream medicine is littered with apparently good ideas from conventional doctors that clinical trials proved to be useless or harmful.
For example. Bill Silverman, an American paediatrician who died in 2004, was a committed advocate of the clinical trial, even though he realized that it was a double-edged sword, capable of either validating or crushing any treatment. In 1949 he began working at the newly opened premature-infant station at the Babies Hospital in New York, and within a few weeks he was dealing with a premature baby suffering from a problem known as retinopathy of prematurity (ROP), which can result in permanent blindness. The baby was the child of the hospital's biochemistry professor, whose wife had previously had six miscarriages. As this was the first time that the professor's wife had successfully given birth, Silverman was particularly distressed at the prospect of the child becoming blind. Grasping at straws, he decided to administer a newly discovered hormone known as ACTH (adreno-corticotropic hormone), which had not previously been used to treat newborn infants. Although it was a fairly hit-and-miss approach, with Silverman varying the dosage according to the baby's response, the end result was that she gained weight, her eyesight recovered and eventually she went home happy and healthy.
Inspired by this recovery, Silverman continued his ACTH treatment with subsequent cases of ROP. Furthermore, he compared his results with the recovery rates of babies with ROP at Lincoln Hospital, which was not offering ACTH treatment. The comparison was striking. Silverman gave ACTH to thirty-one babies suffering with ROP - twenty-five left with normal vision, two with near-normal vision, two with vision in just one eye and only two lost their sight completely. On the other hand, Lincoln Hospital had seven babies with ROP - they all lost their sight, except one.
For many doctors, the existing data - thirty-one babies treated with ACTH with a success rate of 80 per cent versus seven untreated babies with a recovery rate of only 14 per cent - would seem convincing enough. It would have been easy for Silverman to have continued with this therapy and recommended it to colleagues as a method for preventing blindness, but instead he had the humility and courage to question his own discovery. In particular, Silverman could see that his pilot study fell short of the rigour demanded by a high-quality clinical trial. For example, the babies were not randomly assigned to the treatment or non-treatment groups, so maybe the babies at Lincoln Hospital were suffering from particularly serious problems, hence their lower recovery rate. Or maybe Lincoln Hospital's lack of success was a result of poorly trained staff or lack of equipment. Or maybe Lincoln Hospital was just unlucky - after all, the numbers involved were relatively small. To be confident about the efficacy of ACTH, Silverman decided to conduct a properly randomized controlled clinical trial.
Premature babies with ROP were randomly assigned to an ACTH treatment group or a no-treatment control group within the same hospital. Both groups were treated identically, apart from the use or not of ACTH. Within a few months the results emerged. An impressive 70 per cent of the infants treated with ACTH completely recovered their sight. Remarkably, the results in the control group were even more impressive, with an 80 per cent recovery rate. Babies in the untreated group had fared slightly better in terms of avoiding blindness, and moreover they suffered fewer fatalities compared to babies in the group treated with ACTH. It seemed that ACTH offered no benefit to babies and also had side-effects. A follow-up study confirmed the results of Silverman's rigorous clinical trial.
The initial results from the Lincoln Hospital were abnormally poor, which had fooled Silverman into believing that he had discovered a powerful new treatment, but he had been wise enough not to be complacent and rest on his laurels. Instead, he re-tested his own hypothesis and disproved it. Had he had not been so critical of his own work, subsequent generations of paediatricians might have followed his example and administered ACTH, a useless, expensive and potentially harmful treatment.
Silverman was a passionate believer in the randomized clinical trial as the tool for questioning and improving the care of babies, which made him an unusual figure among doctors in the 1950s. Although researchers were convinced of the importance of evidence in determining best practice, the doctors on the ground still tended to be overconfident about their gut instincts. They had faith in their own sense of what the ideal conditions should be for helping premature babies, but according to Silverman this was a primitive way of deciding serious health issues: Like the approach taken by farmers caring for newborn piglets, conditions considered ideal for survival were provided, and it was assumed that those who were 'meant' to survive would do so. But none of these purportedly 'ideal conditions' had ever been subjected to formal parallel-treatment trials ... almost everything we were doing to care for premature infants was untested.
Doctors in the 1950s preferred to rely on what they had seen with their own eyes, and would typically respond to patients with the mantra 'in my experience'. It did not seem to matter to doctors that their personal experience might be limited or misremembered, as opposed to the evidence from research trials, which would be extensive and meticulously documented. That is why Silverman was determined to instil a more systematic approach among his colleagues, and he was supported in his mission by his former tutor Richard Day: Like Dick, I was completely sold on the numerical approach; soon we were making nuisances of ourselves by criticizing the subjective 'in-my-experience' reasoning of our co-workers ... I was increasingly aware that the statistical approach was anathema to free-wheeling doctors who resented any doubts being expressed about the effectiveness of their untested treatments. Half a century later, today's doctors are much more accustomed to the concept of evidence-based medicine, and most accept that a well-designed randomized clinical trial is crucial for deciding what works and what does not. The purpose of this book has simply been to apply these same principles to alternative medicine. So what does evidence-based medicine say about chiropractic therapy?
Manipulating patients
When patients visit a chiropractor, they are usually suffering from back or neck pain. After taking a medical history, the chiropractor will embark on a thorough examination of the back, particularly the bones of the spine, called vertebrae. This will include looking at the patient's posture and overall mobility, as well as feeling along the spine to assess the symmetry and mobility of each spinal joint. Often X-ray images or MRI scans are also used to give a detailed view of the vertebrae. Any misalignment in the spine is then corrected in order to restore the patient's health. Chiropractors see the spinal column as a complex entity, such that each vertebra affects all the others. Hence, a chiropractor might work on a patient's upper spine or neck in order to treat pain in the lower back.
The hallmark treatment of the chiropractor is a range of techniques known as spinal manipulation, which is intended to realign the spine in order to restore the mobility ofjoints. Chiropractors also call this an adjustment. It can be a fairly aggressive technique, which pushes the joint slightly beyond what it is ordinarily capable of achieving. One way to think about spinal manipulation is as the third of three levels of flexibility that can be achieved by a joint. The first level of flexibility is that which is possible with only voluntary movement. A second and higher level of flexibility can be achieved by exerting an external force, which pushes the joint until there is resistance. The third level of flexibility, which corresponds to spinal manipulation, involves a thrusting force that pushes the joint even further. The chiropractor will submit the vertebrae of the spine to this third level of motion by using a technique called high-velocity, low-amplitude thrust. This means that the chiropractor exerts a relatively strong force in order to move the joint at speed, but the extent of the motion needs to be limited, because otherwise there would be damage to the joint and its surrounding structures. Although spinal manipulation is often associated with a cracking sound, this is not a result of the bones crunching against each other or a sign that bones are being put back in their right place. Instead, the noise is caused by the release and popping of gas bubbles, which are generated when the fluid in the joint space is put under severe stress.
If you have never visited a chiropractor, then the easiest way to imagine spinal manipulation is by analogy to an experiment you can do with your hand. Position your right forearm vertically upwards and hold your right hand flat, with the palm facing up - as if you are carrying a tray of drinks. Your wrist should be able to bend backwards so far that your flat hand begins to dip slightly below the horizontal -this is what we have called level-one flexibility. If you use your left hand to press steadily and firmly downwards on your right palm, then the wrist can be bent a little further down by a few degrees, which is level-two flexibility. Imagine - and please do not do this - that your left hand applied an additional short rapid thrust on your right hand, thus bending it down even further by a small amount. This would be level-three flexibility, akin to the sort of action involved in spinal manipulation via a high-velocity, low-amplitude thrust.
Because spinal manipulation is the technique that generally distinguishes chiropractors from other health professionals, it has been at the centre of efforts to establish the medical value of chiropractic therapy. Researchers have conducted dozens of clinical trials in order to evaluate spinal manipulation, but they have tended to generate conflicting results and have often been poorly designed. Fortunately, as with acupuncture and homeopathy, there have been several systematic reviews of these trials, in which experts have attempted to set aside the poor trials, focus on the best-quality trials and establish an overall conclusion that is reliable.
In fact, there have been so many systematic reviews that in 2006 Edzard Ernst and Peter Canter at Exeter University decided to take all of the current ones into account in order to arrive at the most up-to-date and accurate evaluation of chiropractic therapy. Published in the Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, their paper was entitled 'A systematic review of systematic reviews of spinal manipulation'. Ernst and Canter's review of recent reviews covered spinal manipulation in the context of a large range of conditions, but for the time being we will concentrate on the most common problems dealt with by chiropractors, namely back and neck pain. In this context they took into account three reviews looking at back pain alone, two reviews looking at neck pain alone and one review that covered both neck and back pain.
The individual reviews came to varying conclusions. In the case of neck pain, two reviews concluded that spinal manipulation was ineffective, although one of them did find some evidence that chiropractic manipulation could be effective when used in combination with standard treatments. However, the combination effect is hard to disentangle, so it would be difficult to draw anything significant from this. The third review was more positive, concluding that spinal manipulation offered patients a moderate benefit, but it is worth noting that the lead author on this review was a chiropractor. Ernst and Canter had previously shown that chiropractors tend to generate more optimistic conclusions than scientists, perhaps because they have an emotional investment in the result. All in all, the evidence was insubstantial.
For back pain, there was more of a consensus that spinal manipulation could be effective. Each review suggested that, on average, patients received benefit from the sort of treatments offered by chiropractors, but there was disagreement over the extent of that benefit and the evidence was not conclusive. The fact that chiropractic spinal manipulation might help with back pain is not a major milestone in the history of medicine - but it is particularly noteworthy in the context of this book, because this is the most significant evidence so far that an alternative treatment might genuinely help patients.
On the other hand, this conclusion should not be interpreted as an endorsement of chiropractors or a recommendation that patients with back pain should try spinal manipulation. The key question is not merely 'does spinal manipulation work?', but rather 'does spinal manipulation work better than other forms of treatment?'
Dealing with back problems is notoriously difficult, and conventional medicine has struggled to develop truly effective treatments. In terms of dealing with the underlying problem, doctors might recommend physiotherapy or exercise. And in terms of dealing with the symptoms, doctors often prescribe non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen. These approaches are, however, only mildly or marginally effective. A truly life-changing cure for back pain has not yet been found.
When the two approaches are compared against each other, spinal manipulation versus conventional medicine, the result is that each is just about as effective (or ineffective) as the other. Indeed, this was one of the main conclusions of Ernst and Canter's review of reviews: spinal manipulation might help those who suffer with back pain, but conventional approaches offer similarly marginal levels of benefit.
In a situation where two or more rival treatments match each other in terms of their effectiveness, there are several other deciding factors that determine which one is best. The simplest determining factor is often cost, which mitigates strongly against chiropractors, who generally charge a great deal for their services based on the misguided claim that their treatment is superior to conventional treatments. Compare ten sessions with a chiropractor at £50 each with regular exercise or ibuprofen, which are both relatively cheap, and the price difference becomes obvious.
Furthermore, there are more important factors which also favour conventional treatment over chiropractic spinal manipulation. In fact, there are serious problems with chiropractic philosophy and practice, both of which should raise major concerns for prospective patients. These issues are closely linked to the early development of this form of treatment, so in order to appreciate them properly we will take a historical detour and explore the origins of chiropractic therapy.
The bone-setting panacea The first documented account of manipulating the spine for therapeutic reasons dates back to Hippocrates in around 400 BC. In order to deal with back problems, he asked patients to lie face down on a board and  his assistants applied traction by pulling on the head and feet. At the same time, Hippocrates pressed on the painful part of the spine, or sat on it, or bounced up and down, or walked along it. We do not, by the way, recommend you try this at home!
As the centuries passed, it became the responsibility of specialists known as bone-setters to treat bones that were broken, misaligned or dislocated. In Norway the local bone-setter was often a first-born child, whereas in Ireland the bone-setter was typically the seventh-born, but birth order did not matter in Scotland as long as the person had been born feet first. Because bone-setters were not usually formally educated and were not therefore part of the medical establishment, they often drew criticism from physicians. For example, Sarah Mapp, who was one of the most famous bone-setters in London in the 1730s, was nicknamed 'Crazy Sally' by many physicians. Percival Pott, an eminent English surgeon who was the first to demonstrate that soot could cause cancer in chimneysweeps, went further and called her an 'ignorant, illiberal, drunken, female savage'. On the other hand, Sir Hans Sloane, who was President of the Royal College of Physicians, had sufficient respect for 'Crazy Sally' to ask her to treat his niece's back injury.
Chiropractic therapy, which emerged out of the bone-setting tradition, was founded by Daniel David Palmer, who was born near Toronto, Canada, in 1845 and who moved to Iowa at the age of twenty. Palmer gradually developed an interest in medicine, which included spiritual and magnetic healing, but his interest in the potential of spinal manipulation can be traced to a specific event that took place on 18 September 1895. Here is how Palmer later recorded the event: Harvey Lillard, a janitor in the Ryan Block, where 1 had my office, had been so deaf for 17 years that he could not hear the racket of a wagon on the street or the ticking of a watch. I made enquiry as to the cause of his deafness and was informed that when he was exerting himself in a cramped, stooping position, he felt something give in his back and immediately became deaf. An examination showed a vertebra racked from its normal position. I reasoned that if the vertebra was replaced, the man's hearing should be restored. With this object in view, a half hour talk persuaded Mr Lillard to allow me to replace it. I racked it into position by using the spinous process as a lever and soon the man could hear as before.
On its own, this incident would not have started a revolution, but Palmer treated a second patient in a similar manner: Shortly after this relief from deafness, I had a case of heart trouble which was not improving. I examined the spine and found a displaced vertebra pressing against the nerves which innervate the heart. I adjusted the vertebra and gave immediate relief... Then I began to reason if two diseases, so dissimilar as deafness and heart trouble, came from impingement, a pressure on nerves, were not other diseases due to a similar cause? Thus the science (knowledge) and art (adjusting) of Chiropractic were formed at that time. I then began a systematic investigation for the cause of all diseases and have been amply rewarded.
Palmer believed that he had stumbled upon a new medical technique. He was so convinced that chiropractic therapy offered a novel approach to healthcare that he opened the Palmer School of Chiropractic in 1897 in Davenport, Iowa. His reputation and charisma rapidly attracted many students to the school, where the main teaching resource was a textbook entitled The Chiropractor's Adjuster, written by Palmer himself. This outlined every detail of his chiropractic therapy in its 1,000 pages, including how Palmer came to name his new treatment: 'Rev. Samuel H. Weed of Portland selected for me at my request two Greek words, cheir and praxis, meaning when combined "done by hand", from which I coined the word "chiro-practic".'
Perhaps the most surprising feature of Palmer's chiropractic therapy was its ambition. Having allegedly treated deafness and a heart condition by realigning the spine of his patients, he was confident that spinal manipulation could deal with all the ills of the human race. For Palmer, chiropractic therapy was not primarily about treating back problems. He explicitly wrote: 'Ninety-five per cent of all diseases are caused by displaced vertebrae.'
This statement might seem shocking to us, but it made perfect sense Daniel David Palmer
to Palmer, who viewed the spine as key to the health of the entire body. He was keenly aware that the spine provides the highway that connects the brain and the spinal cord to the rest of the body by way of the peripheral nervous system. Hence, according to Palmer, displaced vertebrae would impact on particular neural pathways, negatively influence the organs connected via this pathway and thereby cause diseases. Consequently, if chiropractors realigned these displaced vertebrae then they could cure diseases: not just deafness and heart disease, but also everything from measles to sexual dysfunction.
This is already an extraordinary claim, and it appears even more bizarre when phrased in Palmer's own language. As mentioned earlier in the chapter, Palmer used the term 'subluxation' to describe a displacement in the spine, which resulted in a blockage of the body's so-called 'innate intelligence'. He developed a theory whereby innate intelligence acted as the body's guiding energy, carrying both metaphysical and physiological significance. This is why he believed that blocking its flow seriously disrupted the body's harmony and could lead to all manner of diseases.
It is important to stress that the term 'innate intelligence' is utterly meaningless beyond Palmer's unique view of the human body. On the other hand, the term 'subluxation' is used in orthodox medicine, but has a meaning that has nothing to do with blocking innate intelligence. If a doctor talks about 'subluxation', it simply means a partial dislocation of any joint, such as a twisted ankle. In short, Palmer's 'innate intelligence' and 'subluxation' carry no scientific significance. Figure 5 A chiropractic chart shows how each vertebra relates to different parts of the body and is responsible for various ailments. This simplified chart shows the ailments corresponding to only some of the vertebra. For example, a misaligned third lumber vertebra could cause bladder problems, and realignment could cure this. When Palmer cured his first two patients, he presumably manipulated the fourth cenical vertebra and the second thoracic vertebra, as these are linked with hearing loss and heart problems. The concept of innate intelligence was so strange that it seemed as if chiropractic therapy was not only a new medical doctrine, but also a new religion. Indeed, Palmer viewed God as the Universal Intelligence, guiding the totality of existence, which meant that innate intelligence represented God's guiding influence within the human body. In Palmer's own words, T am the founder of chiropractic in its science, in its art, in its philosophy and in its religious phase'. He even likened himself to 'Christ, Mohamed, Jo. Smith [founder of the Latter Day Saints movement], Mrs. Eddy [founder of the Christian Science church], Martin Luther and otherfs] who have founded religions.'
Conventional doctors were suspicious of Palmer's quasi-religious philosophy, and they were particularly angered by his extraordinary claim that the spine was the root cause of disease and that spinal manipulation was the best way to cure patients. They were annoyed by his boast that 'chiropractic is a science of healing without drugs', and they were alarmed by his refusal to acknowledge the role of germs in causing many of the diseases prevalent at the time. Not surprisingly, it was not long before there was a campaign against Palmer, led by a local doctor named Heinrich Matthey. He accused Palmer of teaching an unproven medical concept and practising medicine without a licence. In fact, this led to Palmer being taken to court three times and on the third occasion, in 1906, he was sentenced to time in jail when he refused to pay a fine. If anything, this strengthened the fast-growing movement: chiropractic therapy had its first martyr, and many more would follow.
D. D. Palmer's son was Bartlett Joshua Palmer, and it was he who continued to promote chiropractic therapy while his father was indisposed. He became successful in his own right, so much so that he was able to buy the first car in Davenport, but unfortunately in 1913 he ran over his father at the Palmer School of Chiropractic homecoming parade. D. D. Palmer died just a few weeks later - officially the cause of the death was recorded as typhoid, but it seems more likely that his death was a direct result of injuries caused by his son. Indeed, there is speculation that this was not an accident, but rather a case of patricide. Father and son had become bitter rivals over the leadership of the chiropractic movement. Also B.J. Palmer had always resented his father and the way that he had treated his family: When each of our sisters reached eighteen, they were driven out of home and onto the streets of Davenport to make their living any way they could ... All three of us got beatings with straps until we carried welts, for which father was often arrested and spent nights in jail ... Father was so deeply involved and so busy with thinking and writings on Chiropractic, he hardly knew he had any children.
B.J. Palmer, who already led the Universal Chiropractic Association, became the new undisputed figurehead of the movement. He was a smart operator and shrewd entrepreneur. He rapidly accumulated a large fortune by teaching students and treating patients. On top of all this, in 1924 he started a lucrative sideline in selling neurocalometers, which supposedly helped chiropractors by detecting subluxations. Palmer was very proud of his invention and promoted it widely, but from a modern point of view we can see that it was clearly a worthless piece of technology. The neurocalometer contained nothing more than a simple thermocouple, which is a standard piece of electrical equipment designed to measure temperature. Hence, it would have been useless for detecting misalignments in the spine or pinched nerves. Although each neurocalometer cost less than $100 to build, he initially sold them for $1,150, and then he increased the price to $2,200. To put this figure into context, $2,200 would have been enough to buy a house in Iowa in the 1920s, and yet Palmer somehow persuaded over 2,000 graduates from his college and other chiropractors to buy his bogus invention.
Not surprisingly, his customers ended up dissatisfied. An attorney acting on behalf of one of the disgruntled customers attempted to sue Palmer: 'In all our experience as practicing attorneys, nothing more closely resembling a fraud and a swindle has ever been brought to our personal attention than this proposition which your school is submitting to its graduates.'
In such situations, Palmer would repair his reputation by promoting himself on WOC, one of America's pioneering radio stations, which he had established in 1922. Although it carried programmes on a range of subjects, such as current affairs and cookery, it also broadcast lectures by Palmer as well as other programmes directly related to chiropractic therapy. Its audience stretched across large parts of America and Canada, and Palmer even claimed he had listeners in Scotland, Samoa and at the North Pole.
Thanks to his radio station and other clever marketing techniques, Palmer oversaw the growth of the chiropractic movement over the next few decades, not just in America but also in Europe. For example, the British Chiropractic Association was founded in 1925 and the European Chiropractors' Union formed in 1932, by which time there were 126 chiropractors in Britain, seventy-six across Norway, Denmark and Sweden, and a few dozen others in Ireland, Belgium and elsewhere.
Meanwhile, back in America, chiropractors were coming under increasing pressure from the medical establishment, which disapproved of their philosophy and methods. Doctors continued to encourage the arrest of chiropractors for practising medicine without a licence, and by 1940 there had been over 15,000 prosecutions. Palmer strongly endorsed the Universal Chiropractic Association's policy of covering legal expenses and supporting members who had been arrested, which resulted in 80 per cent of chiropractors walking free from court.
When the legal route failed to dampen chiropractic spirits, the American Medical Association (AMA) tried other tactics, which culminated in 1963 in the formation of the Committee on Quackery. Its secretary, H. Doyle Taylor, wrote a memo to the AM A Board of Trustees, which reaffirmed that the Committee on Quackery considered its prime mission to be the 'containment of Chiropractic and ultimately the elimination of Chiropractic.' The Committee's activities included lobbying to keep chiropractors outside the Medicare health-insurance programme, and arguing that chiropractic therapy should not be recognized by the US Office of Education.
This antagonism might seem unreasonable, but remember that the medical establishment had several reasons for despising chiropractors. These included their belief in the unscientific notion of innate intelligence, their denial that bacteria and viruses cause many diseases, and their conviction that realigning a patient's spine could cure every ailment. On top of all this, conventional doctors were shocked by the fact that many chiropractors were fond of the E-meter, another bizarre diagnostic gadget. Invented in the 1940s by a chiropractor named Volney Mathison, the E-meter has a needle that swings back and forth across a scale when a patient holds on to two electrical contacts -apparently this is enough to determine a patient's state of health. The E-meter was also widely used by the Church of Scientology, so much so that many Scientologists believe that it was invented by their founder L. Ron Hubbard. Unfortunately, the E-meter is nothing more than a piece of technical hocus-pocus, which is why in 1963 the US Food & Drug Administration seized more than 100 of them from the Founding Church of Scientology. In many ways, the E-meter bears a resemblance to the equally bogus neurocalometer, invented two decades earlier by B. J. Palmer.
Conventional doctors were equally dismissive of applied kinesiology, a method invented in 1964 by a chiropractor called George J. Goodheart, who argued that diseases could be identified by manually testing the strength of muscle groups. A patient's muscles supposedly become immediately stronger if a treatment is beneficial, or the muscles become weaker if the treatment is harmful, or if a toxin or allergen is brought close to the body. Typically, the patient holds out an arm and a tester pushes against it to feel the strength and steadiness of the resistance. This is, of course, a highly subjective measurement, and it is hard to imagine why it should have any medical value. Indeed, controlled trials show that the claims of applied kinesiology have no basis in reality.
As far as the AM A was concerned, all these problems were compounded by the ambition of many chiropractors to act as primary care givers. In other words, chiropractors argued that they could replace general practitioners because they could also offer regular check-ups, long-term preventative treatments and cures for many conditions. In the 1950s and 1960s it was possible to find adverts for chiropractors with claims such as 'there are very few diseases, as they are understood today, which are not treatable by Chiropractic method', or 'Correction and treatment of both acute and chronic polio by chiropractic methods have been unusually successful.'
The AMA continued to fight back with its concerted effort to eliminate the chiropractic profession, but in 1976 its campaign suddenly backfired. 'Sore Throat', an anonymous source within the AMA, leaked material that revealed the details and the extent of the AMA's campaign, which prompted Chester A. Wilk, a chiropractor from Chicago, to file an anti-trust lawsuit against the AMA. Wilk was arguing that the AMA's campaign against chiropractors amounted to anti-competitive behaviour, and that the medical establishment was merely trying to corner the market in treating patients.
After dragging on for over a decade, the lawsuit eventually ended in 1987. Judge Susan Getzendanner, who had presided over the case, ruled that the AMA had indeed acted unfairly against chiropractors: Evidence at the trial showed that the defendants took active steps, often covert, to undermine chiropractic educational institutions, conceal evidence of the usefulness of chiropractic care, undercut insurance programs for patients of chiropractors, subvert government inquiries into the efficacy of chiropractic, engage in a massive disinformation campaign to discredit and destabilize the chiropractic profession and engage in numerous other activities to maintain a medical physician monopoly over health care in this country.
The AMA took the decision to the Supreme Court, but the appeal failed in 1990 and thereafter the AMA was forced to alter its attitude. For example, it could no longer discourage its members from collaborating with chiropractors. Although the medical establishment had fought against this move, it had to acknowledge that it resulted in two undoubtedly positive outcomes. First, those doctors who collaborated with chiropractors persuaded many of them to be more sympathetic to the ideas of conventional medicine. Second, it also encouraged many chiropractors to rethink their attitude to their own chiropractic therapy. In fact, many chiropractors were already becoming increasingly disillusioned with the outlandish claims of their founding fathers. Although these practitioners were still committed to using chiropractic therapy to treat musculoskeletal problems, they were reluctant to treat other conditions and were suspicious about the concept of innate intelligence. In short, these rebel chiropractors adopted a more defined job description, namely back specialists. They became known as mixers, because they were willing to mix traditional chiropractic therapy with elements of mainstream medicine.
By contrast, chiropractors who strictly adhered to Palmer's philosophy were known as straights. They firmly believed every word Palmer had preached, including his core belief that a perfectly aligned spine would guarantee the flow of the 'innate' and thus promote well-being throughout the entire body. The split between straights and mixers soon became bitter, with straights accusing mixers of betraying the chiropractic movement, and mixers accusing straights of being quacks. In 1998 Lon Morgan, a mixer, openly expressed his antagonism towards straight chiropractors and their odd beliefs: 'Innate Intelligence clearly has its origins in borrowed mystical and occult practices of a bygone era. It remains untestable and unverifiable and has an unacceptably high penalty/benefit ratio for the chiropractic profession.' Similarly, according to Joseph C. Keating, a mixer and a chiropractic historian: 'So long as we propound the "One cause, one cure" rhetoric of Innate, we should expect to be met by ridicule from the wider health science community.' In response, straights have accused mixers of not being real chiropractors, because they do not accept Palmer's basis for chiropractic therapy.
It is relatively easy to find out who is right - straights or mixers -because the former set of chiropractors claims to cure everything and the latter restricts its ambitions to the back and neck. Ordeal by clinical trial is the obvious method for settling such an argument. In fact, many clinical trials have been conducted to test the impact of spinal manipulation on a range of conditions, and many of these were covered within the review of reviews by Ernst and Canter, which was discussed earlier in this chapter. We have already considered their conclusions relating to back and neck pain, but now it is time to look at their other conclusions.
Ernst and Canter looked at ten systematic reviews based on seventy trials that considered spinal manipulation as a treatment for headaches, period pains, infantile colic, asthma and allergies. Their conclusions were universally negative - there was no evidence to suggest that chiropractors could treat any of these conditions.
This should not be very surprising, as there is no logical, rational or scientific reason why manipulating a patient's spine should treat, for example, allergies. Moreover, there is no evidence that a misaligned spine can cause any of these non-musculoskeletal conditions in the first place. Indeed, if spinal misalignments caused disease, then we would expect people with back pain to be more likely to suffer with other ailments, but in 1995 Donald Nansel and Mark Szlazak at the Palmer College of Chiropractic found no sign of this in the vast body of published medical literature: 'There is not the slightest suggestion that patients suffering from severe primary mechanical low back pain, for instance, are more prone to develop higher incidences of prostate or testicular carcinoma, colitis, ovarian cysts, endometriosis, pancreatitis, appendicitis, diabetes, melitis, or any other category of regionally or segmentally related organ disease.' In a follow-up study published two years later, the same researchers also failed to find any evidence that these diseases were more likely in 'patients with broken necks or broken backs, or patients with entire hips or shoulders blown apart by shotgun blasts'.
Although Ernst and Canter's review of reviews does not cover the impact of chiropractic manipulation on every non-musculoskeletal condition, it would be reasonable to conclude that chiropractors can offer nothing to help patients suffering from non-musculoskeletal conditions in general. This is partly because chiropractic therapy has failed whenever it has been tested as a treatment for specific non-musculoskeletal conditions, and it is partly because - and this is worth stressing again - there is no reason why spinal manipulation should help with conditions ranging from ear infections to irritable bowel syndrome.
Bearing all this in mind, the scientific evidence shows that it would be unwise to visit a chiropractor for anything other than a problem directly related to your back.
This might seem obvious, but several surveys suggest that between 11 per cent and 19 per cent of American chiropractic patients suffer from non-musculoskeletal conditions. These patients are attracted to these pointless treatments by practitioners who are willing to offer them. According to one survey, 90 per cent of American chiropractors think that the therapy should not be limited to musculoskeletal conditions, and another survey suggests that 78 per cent of Canadian chiropractors share this opinion - this indicates that the majority of North American chiropractors have straight tendencies. The percentages in Europe may be similar, particularly as supposedly responsible chiropractic bodies in European countries offer misleading information about the power of chiropractic therapy. For example, the General Chiropractic Council, which oversees chiropractic therapy in Britain, publishes a leaflet entitled 'What can I expect when I see a chiropractor?', which states that chiropractic therapy can lead to an improvement in 'some types of asthma, headaches, including migraine, and infant colic'. Yet it is well known that the evidence from trials fails to support these claims.
Some words of caution for patients
In short, the scientific evidence suggests that it is only worth seeing a chiropractor if you have a back problem. However, it is still important to be cautious. In particular, we will offer six pieces of advice that should be useful for anybody considering a visit to a chiropractor: 1 Make sure that your chiropractor is a mixer and not a straight. It
would be unwise to be treated by a chiropractic fundamentalist, namely someone who believes in subluxations, innate intelligence and the ability of spinal manipulation to cure all diseases. The terms 'straight' and 'mixer' do not generally appear on a chiropractor's business card, so the best way to identify a straight is to ask about the range of conditions that he or she claims to treat - a straight chiropractor will offer treatments for respiratory conditions, digestive disorders, menstrual problems, ear infections, pregnancy-related conditions, infectious and parasitic conditions, dermatological diseases, acute urinary conditions and many other ailments. 2 If you visit a chiropractor and the problem is not resolved within six sessions, or there is no ongoing significant improvement within six sessions, then be prepared to stop treatment and consult your doctor for advice. Chiropractors have a reputation for lengthy and expensive treatments, as demonstrated by a survey in 2006 that monitored ninety-six patients with acute neck pain. Although the patients generally reported improvements, the treatments required twenty-four visits on average, and in two cases there were more than eighty treatment sessions. It is likely that the majority of these recoveries had little to do with the chiropractic intervention, but were largely the result of time and the body's own natural healing processes.
3 Do not allow a chiropractor to become your primary healthcare provider, which might include preventative and maintenance treatments covering all health issues. In 1995, a survey showed that 90 per cent of American chiropractors considered themselves primary care providers, but they are rarely qualified to take on this role. Patients are often impressed by the fact that many chiropractors cany the title Doctor, but this does not mean that they have attended medical school. The title generally indicates Doctor of Chiropractic (DC), which merely means that a practitioner has completed a chiropractic course lasting four years.
4 Avoid chiropractors who rely on unorthodox techniques for diagnosing patients, such as applied kinesiology and the E-meter, which were described earlier. Such techniques are usually employed by straight chiropractors.
5 Check the reputation of your chiropractor before embarking on any treatment, because chiropractors are more likely than medical doctors to be involved in malpractice. According to a survey conducted in California in 2004, chiropractors were twice as likely as medical doctors to be the subject of disciplinary actions. Even more worrying, the incidence rate for fraud was nine times higher for chiropractors than for doctors, and the rate for sexual boundary transgressions was three times higher for chiropractors than doctors.
6 Last, but not least, try conventional treatments before turning to a chiropractor for back pain. They are generally cheaper than spinal manipulation and just as likely to be effective. There are also other reasons for following the conventional route, but we will come to these later in the chapter.
The advice above is based on serious and well-founded criticisms of some elements of the chiropractic community. For example, chiropractors, particularly in America, have earned a reputation for zealously recruiting and unnecessarily treating patients. Practice-building seminars are commonplace and there are numerous publications aimed at helping chiropractors find and retain patients. In many cases the emphasis seems to be placed on economics rather than healthcare: the chiropractor Peter Fernandez is the author of a five-volume series called Secrets of a Practice-Building Consultant, which starts with a volume boldly titled 1,001 Ways to Attract Patients and ends with How to Become a Million Dollar a Year Practitioner.
Many chiropractors are embarrassed by the zealous profiteering of their colleagues. For instance, G. Douglas Anderson, writing in Dynamic Chiropractic, has argued that the chiropractic movement needs a radical overhaul: It is high time we admit there is nothing conservative, holistic or natural about endless care, creating addiction to manipulation, or making unsubstantiated, cure-all claims. On the contrary, an excellent argument can be made that the variety of tricks, techniques and claims still used by a large percentage of our profession to keep fully functional, asymptomatic people returning for care is fraudulent.
According to Joseph C. Keating, himself a chiropractor, the tendency to profiteer and mislead can be traced back to the founders of the chiropractic therapy, particularly B.J. Palmer: 'Indeed, the profession, as a unified body politic, has never truly renounced the marketing and advertising excesses modelled by B. J. and many clinical procedures and innovations since are noteworthy for the extraordinary and unsubstantiated claims which are made for them.' It seems that chiropractors are fond of manipulating their patients in both senses of the word.
Stephen Barrett, a US psychiatrist and medical writer, has been at the forefront of criticizing and exposing other shady aspects of chiropractic therapy. For example, he conducted a small experiment to see how four chiropractors would diagnose and deal with the same healthy patient, a twenty-nine-year-old woman: The first diagnosed 'atlas subluxation' and predicted 'paralysis in fifteen years' if this problem was not treated. The second found many vertebrae 'out of alignment' and one hip 'higher' than the other. The third said that the woman's neck was 'tight'. The fourth said that misaligned vertebrae indicated the presence of 'stomach problems'. All four recommended spinal adjustment on a regular basis, beginning with a frequency of twice a week. Three gave adjustments without warning - one of which was so forceful that it produced dizziness and a headache that lasted several hours.
Barrett's study of chiropractors was neither exhaustive nor definitive, but his limited sampling did suggest that there is something rotten at the heart of the chiropractic profession. Chiropractors dealing with the same healthy individual could agree on neither the diagnosis nor which part of the spine was problematic - all that they could agree on was that regular chiropractic therapy was the solution. Perhaps this should not be surprising when we bear in mind that the underlying principles of chiropractic therapy, the notions of subluxations and innate intelligence, are meaningless.
In addition to all this, and even more worrying, is Barrett's last sentence, which mentions that his undercover patient suffered 'dizziness and a headache that lasted several hours'. This raises an important issue that we have not yet discussed, namely safety. Every medical treatment should offer the likelihood of benefit, but it will also, almost inevitably, carry a likelihood of side-effects. The key issue for patients is simple: does the likely extent of the benefit outweigh the likely extent of the adverse side-effects, and how does this risk-benefit analysis compare to other treatments? As we shall discuss below, the dangers of chiropractic therapy can be serious and in some cases life-threatening.
The dangers of chiropractic therapy
Often the first hazard encountered when visiting a chiropractor is undergoing an X-ray examination, which seems to be a routine procedure among many practitioners. A survey conducted across Europe in 1994 revealed that 64 per cent of patients received X-rays when visiting a chiropractor, and a survey of members of the American Chiropractic Association conducted in the same year suggested that 96 per cent of new patients and 80 per cent of returning patients were X-rayed. Although many chiropractic publications explicitly advise against the routine use of X-rays, these surveys reveal an almost cavalier approach to a technology that does carry a risk of causing cancer.
It is estimated that on average medical X-rays are responsible for 14 per cent of our annual exposure to radiation. Much of the remaining 86 per cent comes from natural sources such as radon gas seeping up through the ground. The increased risk of cancer due to X-rays is small, but it is not negligible. According to a paper published in the Lancet in 2004, roughly 700 of the 124,000 new cancer cases diagnosed each year in the UK are due to medical X-rays. Although X-rays therefore account for 0.6 per cent of new cancer cases, they continue to be used widely in medicine because they offer tremendous benefits in terms of diagnosing and monitoring patients. In other words, conventional doctors are willing to use X-rays because the benefits outweigh the potential harm, but at the same time they minimize the use of X-rays, employing them only when there is a clear reason to do so.
In contrast, chiropractors may X-ray the same patient several times a year, even though there is no clear evidence that X-rays will help the therapist treat the patient. X-rays can reveal neither the subluxations nor the innate intelligence associated with chiropractic philosophy, because they do not exist. There is no conceivable reason at all why X-raying the spine should help a straight chiropractor treat an ear infection, asthma or period pains. Most worrying of all, chiropractors generally require a full spine X-ray, which delivers a significantly higher radiation dose than most other X-ray procedures.
This raises the question of why so many chiropractors are so keen to X-ray their patients. Partly they are blindly following a corrupt methodology and a bankrupt philosophy that has been passed down through the decades, while ignoring the latest advice from experts. On top of this, it is important to remember that X-raying patients is a very lucrative part of any chiropractic business.
In addition to the risk associated with X-rays, the actual manipulation of the spine can also have negative repercussions. In 2001, a systematic review of five studies revealed that roughly half of all chiropractic patients experience temporary adverse effects, such as pain, numbness, stiffness, dizziness and headaches. These are relatively minor adverse effects, but the frequency is very high, and this has to be weighed against the limited benefit offered by chiropractic therapy.
More worryingly, patients can also suffer serious problems such as dislocations and fractures. These hazards are more likely and more dangerous for older patients, who may be suffering from osteoporosis. For instance, in 1992 the Journal of Manipulative and Physiological Therapeutics reported the case of a seventy-two-year-old woman who visited a chiropractor complaining of back pain. She received twenty-three treatment sessions over the course of six weeks, which resulted in multiple spinal compression fractures.
On top of all these risks, there is an even more serious hazard associated with chiropractic therapy. To appreciate this hazard, we need to refer back to Figure 5 on page 160, which shows the structure of the spine. It consists of five regions - the coccygeal region is at the base, followed by the sacral, lumbar and thoracic regions, with the cervical region at the top. The most severe risk relates to manipulation of the cervical region. There are seven vertebrae that make up this region, running from the base of the neck to the back of the skull. This is one of the most flexible parts in our body, but this flexibility comes at a cost. The region is hugely vulnerable as it carries all the lifelines between the head and the body. In particular, these vertebrae are in close proximity to the two vertebral arteries, which are threaded through pairs of holes on either side of each vertebra. This is illustrated in Figure 6.
Before supplying oxgen-rich blood to the brain, each artery takes a sharp twist because of the structure of the topmost vertebra. This kink in the arteries is perfectly natural and causes no problems, except when the neck is stretched and simultaneously turned in an extreme or sudden way. This can occur when chiropractors perform their hallmark high-velocity, low-amplitude thrust manipulation. Such an action can result in a so-called vertebral dissection, which means that the inner lining of the artery becomes torn. Vertebral dissection can affect blood flow in four ways. First, a blood clot can form around the damaged area, gradually blocking that section of the artery. Second, the clot can eventually become dislodged, be carried into the brain and block a distant part of the artery. Third, blood can become trapped between the inner and outer layers of the artery, which causes swelling, thereby also reducing the blood flow. Fourth, the injury to the artery can cause it to go into spasm; this means it contracts and effectively prevents blood flow. In all four situations, vertebral dissection can ultimately cut off the blood supply to some parts of the brain, which in turn would lead to a stroke. In the most serious cases, stroke can lead to permanent brain damage or death.
Unfortunately, manipulating the cervical region is a common practice among chiropractors, because it was promoted by B. J. Palmer as the most powerful chiropractic 'cure-all'. Chiropractors have been oblivious to the damage that they might have been causing, because there is often a delay between the vertebral dissection and the blockage of blood to the brain. Hence, the link between chiropractic therapy and strokes went unnoticed for decades. Recently, however, cases have been identified where manipulating the cervical region has certainly been the cause of vertebral dissection.
One of the most clear-cut cases highlighting the dangers of spinal manipulation concerns Laurie Mathiason, a twenty-year-old Canadian, who visited a chiropractor twenty-one times between July 1997 and February 1998 in order to relieve her low back pain. On each occasion the chiropractor manipulated her cervical vertebrae, but after her penultimate visit she complained of pain and stiffness in her neck. That evening she became clumsy, dropping ashtrays and plates at the restaurant where she worked, so she returned to the chiropractor the next day.
As the chiropractor manipulated her neck once again, Laurie began to cry, her eyes started to roll, she foamed at the mouth, her body began to convulse and she turned blue. She was rushed to hospital, slipped into a coma and died three days later.
The sudden and unusual nature of Laurie's death led to an inquest, with the aims of establishing the circumstances of her death and preventing similar tragedies in the future. After four days of evidence, it seemed that the penultimate chiropractic treatment had almost certainly damaged Laurie's vertebral artery, which caused a blood clot in one of the arteries supplying her brain and led to the relatively mild effects she felt that evening. The final treatment then dislodged the blood clot, which subsequently travelled to Laurie's brain and killed her.
The coroner's jury attributed Laurie's death to 'traumatic rupture of the left vertebral artery', and the coroner declared: 'So at this point, the public knows that Laurie died of a ruptured vertebral artery, which occurred in association with a chiropractic manipulation of the neck.' The jury also suggested a series of measures aimed at minimizing the risks to patients, which initially seemed to be well received by the senior figures in the chiropractic community. Unfortunately, this positive reaction from chiropractors rapidly evaporated, as they failed to implement the recommendations of the inquest and began to deny responsibility for Laurie's death.
Two days after the inquest ended, Paul Carey, president of the Canadian Chiropractic Protective Association, boldly stated on CBC Radio: 'The jury members did not make a direct relationship to the chiropractic adjustment.' Just a few weeks later, a press release from the Canadian Chiropractic Association claimed: 'The jury did not make a finding that chiropractic treatment was the cause of this tragedy.' These statements were followed by chiropractic newspapers, newsletters, leaflets and advertisements that seemed to contradict the findings of the inquest, which only added to the grief felt by the Mathiason family. Laurie's mother, Sharon Mathiason, was openly critical when these pronouncements appeared: I say that what chiropractors are doing is waging a coordinated, intentional campaign of fraud and deceit on the Canadian public. This does not allow anyone who is contemplating going to a chiropractor to have a full and accurate truth about Laurie's death. People are not being properly informed of the risk of chiropractic.
The case of Laurie Mathiason is certainly not unique. Indeed, in Canada alone there have been several other young women, such as Dora Labonte, Lana Dale Lewis and Pierrette Parisien, who have died soon after receiving chiropractic manipulation of the neck. These high-profile cases have made headlines and generated major discussions about the safety of chiropractic manipulation, but the key question is whether these tragedies are freak accidents, perhaps involving patients who were already vulnerable to strokes, or whether they are the tip of an iceberg, hinting at a widespread risk for all patients.
There have been several attempts to assess the level of risk associated with chiropractic neck manipulation, and the one that is most often quoted by chiropractors is a study entitled The Appropriateness of Manipulation and Mobilization of the Cervical Spine. Conducted in 1996, it estimated that the number of strokes, cord compressions, fractures and large blood clots was 1.46 per million neck manipulations. This is a remarkably small risk, essentially one in a million, but it is misleadingly low for two reasons. First, experts suspect that the vast majority of incidents go unreported and unrecognized, so most incidents could not have been included in the study. Second, a patient may receive more than ten treatments for a particular condition, thus increasing the risk by a factor of more than ten.
Other surveys have suggested higher risks, and perhaps the most significant study was published by Canadian researchers in 2001, concluding that the risk of artery damage is one incident per 100,000 individuals receiving chiropractic neck manipulation. They compared patients who had suffered damage to their vertebral arteries with control groups with no history of stroke. The results showed that patients under forty-five years of age who had suffered torn arteries were five times more likely to have visited a chiropractor in the week prior to the damage being recognized than healthy individuals of a similar age. This implies that chiropractic treatment can increase the risk of damaged arteries by a factor of five.
One of us, Professor Ernst, has repeatedly reviewed the literature on the risks of spinal manipulation. To date, about 700 cases of serious complications have been documented in these publications. This should be a major concern for health officials, particularly as under-reporting will mean that the actual number of cases is much higher. Indeed, if spinal manipulation were a drug with such serious and widespread adverse effects and so little demonstrable benefit, then it would almost certainly have been taken off the market by now.
The risk of torn arteries caused by chiropractors, and the dire consequences of such damage, raises three serious criticisms of the chiropractic profession. First, it is surprising that the exact risk associated with spinal manipulation is so poorly understood. Chiropractors seem to have no system for recording and monitoring the damage that they may inadvertently cause, and therefore they seem to be avoiding any attempt to assess the safety of their profession. This problem was highlighted in 2001, when a team of researchers, including Edzard Ernst, asked members of the Association of British Neurologists to report cases of neurological complications referred to them that had occurred within twenty-four hours of neck manipulation. They identified thirty-five cases, which included nine strokes, over the course of one year. Ernst and his colleagues were shocked to find that none of these cases had hitherto attracted any attention, inasmuch as they had not been reported in the medical literature or anywhere else.
The approach of the chiropractic profession stands in stark contrast to the conventional medical establishment, which rigorously assesses the safety of drugs before they are made publicly available. Even when a drug is available for prescription, doctors are encouraged to continue to monitor and report any adverse incidents in order to identify any rare side-effects. In Britain, this programme of ongoing vigilance is called the Yellow Card Scheme and it is administered by the Medical Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). This and other methods are the reasons why we learn about hitherto unknown risks and why we can, if risks emerge, withdraw a drug. Nothing remotely similar exists in the world of chiropractic.
The second criticism of chiropractors is that they often fail to warn patients of the potential risks of their treatment. A study published by chiropractors in 2005 assessed the consent policy among 150 randomly selected chiropractors in the United Kingdom, and it revealed that only 23 per cent always discussed serious risks with their patients before treatment. This contravenes the requirements of the Department of Health in the UK: 'Before you examine, treat or care for competent adult patients you must obtain their consent. .. Patients need sufficient information before they can decide whether to give their consent: for example information about the benefits and risks of the proposed treatment, and alternative treatments.' It also falls short of the Code of Practice of the British General Chiropractic Council: 'Before instituting any examination or treatment, a chiropractor shall ensure that informed consent to such treatment or examination has been given. Failure to obtain informed consent may lead to criminal or civil proceedings.'
The third criticism is that chiropractors continue to offer treatments for non-musculoskeletal conditions, even though spinal manipulation can have no impact on these conditions. This is an issue of concern that has already been raised, but it becomes even more problematic if we bear in mind the two previous criticisms. Not only is spinal manipulation useless in terms of treating, for example, asthma, but it also carries a potentially deadly risk and patients are not always informed of this.
Earlier in this chapter we offered some words of caution to patients who might be considering seeing a chiropractor, but we would like to add to this advice in light of the serious risks that we have now outlined. For example, we have stated that chiropractic therapy can sometimes help with back problems, and therefore short-term treatment from a mixer chiropractor can be helpful, but we have also stated that chiropractors tend to be no better than conventional physiotherapists at treating such conditions. Hence, because physio-therapeutic exercise is a much safer treatment than chiropractic manipulation, we would strongly recommend the former rather than the latter as the first choice.
Another treatment option, which we would also recommend ahead of chiropractic therapy, is osteopathy. The origins of osteopathy are similar to those of chiropractic therapy, inasmuch as both emerged in North America at the end of the nineteenth century as the result of discoveries made by charismatic mavericks. In the case of osteopathy, the founder was Andrew Taylor Still. He believed that manipulating bones in general, not just the spine, improved blood flow and enhanced the nervous system. Moreover, he argued that manipulating bones could enable the body to heal every possible illness!
Although the traditional ambitions of both chiropractic therapy and osteopathy - manipulating the spine or bones in general can cure everything - are equally bizarre and misguided, we would advise the latter rather than the former for several reasons. First, osteopaths have largely shed the more bizarre beliefs and claims from their early days and are today more solidly grounded in science. Second, they usually employ gentler techniques which cause fewer adverse side-effects. Third, they use fewer X-rays and are less likely to employ untested diagnostic methods. Fourth, they generally do focus on conditions relating to the spine and the musculoskeletal system, leaving other diseases to other specialists. Importantly, however, cranial osteopathy is not a treatment that we would recommend as there is no evidence at all that it works. Both osteopathy and cranial osteopathy are explained in more detail in the appendix.
If you do still decide to visit a chiropractor, despite all our concerns and warnings, then we would very strongly recommend that you start your consultation by confirming that your chiropractor will not be manipulating your neck. Even if your problem relates to your lower back, it is still worth stressing that your neck should not be touched, as many chiropractors will manipulate the neck without informed consent in order to address a whole range of conditions. Indeed, Laurie Mathiason, who died in 1998, was having her neck manipulated even though she was concerned about a pain in her lower back.
Finally, before ending this section on the risks of chiropractic therapy, it is important to stress that all the concerns that have been raised also apply to the treatment of children. Many parents feel that they are acting in their children's best interests by taking them to see a chiropractor, but they should be aware that they are exposing them to the hazards of X-rays, temporary adverse reactions, spinal injuries and even stroke. In fact, the dangers to children are particularly worrying, because children's bones continue growing right to the end of their teenage years, so a chiropractor would be manipulating an immature spine.
As with adults, many chiropractors are willing to treat children for wholly inappropriate conditions, such as asthma, bedwetting, clumsiness, ear infections, gastric problems, hyperactivity, immune-system problems, learning disorders and respiratory problems. Chiropractors will claim to be able to treat such conditions, but we know that the evidence does not suggest that spinal manipulation can offer any benefit. Prompted by these sorts of unfounded claims, the journalists Paul Benedetti and Wayne MacPhail have investigated the issues surrounding children and chiropractic therapy, and they included their findings in Spin Doctors: The Chiropractic Industry Under Examination. They focused their attention on their native Canada, where virtually all chiropractors deal with children, and where a significant fraction of parents seek out chiropractic treatment for their offspring. Indeed, according to a survey conducted in 2004 in Toronto, 31 per cent of children had been treated by a chiropractor.
To find out what happens to children who visit a chiropractor, Benedetti and MacPhail arranged for a colleague to accompany an eleven-year-old-girl, known as Judy, to visit five chiropractors in the Toronto area in 2001. Judy was also examined by Dr John Wedge, an experienced paediatric orthopaedic surgeon at Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children, who confirmed that she was 'a perfectly healthy girl'. The goal was to find out if the chiropractors would agree with Dr Wedge's conclusion.
The chiropractors were told that Judy was generally in good health, but that she suffered from a few earaches, some mild headaches and allergies, and that there was concern about the possibility of asthma. One chiropractor examined Judy and agreed that she was fine and recommended no spinal manipulation, but the other four found a whole range of problems. Moreover, different chiropractors found different problems and gave conflicting diagnoses.
According to Benedetti and MacPhail: 'The other four put her through a barrage of tests and found imbalances, partially locked vertebrae, asymmetry, uneven weight distribution, and a spinal column riddled from top to bottom with subluxations. They found subluxations in the upper, middle and lower spine, but not necessarily in the same vertebrae.' The chiropractors claimed that the subluxations that they had identified could lead to learning problems, digestive ailments and reproductive difficulties, and one of them claimed to detect signs of early osteoarthritis. Not surprisingly, these chiropractors recommended spinal adjustment, with one of them proposing immediate care in the form of six visits a week for two weeks, then three times a week for six weeks, followed by twice weekly visits until the problems had improved.
The journalists transcribed the comments of the chiropractors. One suspected that Judy's problems could be traced back to her birth: 'The surgeon or somebody grabbing her head, twisting it one way or the other. A lot of stress was created. I would estimate probably 85 to 95 per cent of all the problems I see in adults start from the process of delivery if you can believe it.' Another chiropractor took a thermal scan of Judy's back and phoned her uncle later to explain the results: 'Okay. I can tell you that her scan is horrible. Her thermography scan is terrible. From the top of her neck all the way down to the upper part of her low back is showing nerve interference. That's a huge area in someone her age. Now, I haven't seen her X-rays obviously because I don't think you've had them done yet, is that correct?' Although the uncle explained that Judy's mother did not want her daughter to be X-rayed, the chiropractor tried to change her decision: 'Okay, her mum would need to speak to me then. But I really think it's necessary, especially seeing what I'm seeing on the scan and what I saw in the exam.'
Encouraging a child to have unnecessary X-rays, raising unjustified concerns about serious conditions and offering to manipulate immature bones all reflect badly on the chiropractic profession. Benedetti and MacPhail, however, uncovered an even more disturbing practice, namely the chiropractic manipulation of babies. One of their colleagues pretended to be the mother of a two-year-old baby prone to ear infections and called fifty chiropractors selected at random from the Toronto phone directory. Her survey revealed that 72 per cent offered to treat her fictional child, even though there is no evidence that chiropractors can help with ear infections.
The risks of alternative medicine
Most people view alternative medicine as a safe option. On the other hand, conventional medicine is often criticized because of the side-effects of pharmaceutical drugs or the risks associated with surgery. But is alternative medicine really safer than conventional medicine?
We have already seen that chiropractic therapy carries a range of risks, from the minor hazard associated with X-rays to the strokes that can be caused by manipulation of the upper spine. In short, chiropractic therapy is certainly more dangerous than conventional physiotherapeutic exercise. But, what about the other alternative therapies?
In the previous chapters we deliberately omitted the issue of safety in the context of acupuncture and homeopathy, as we wanted to focus initially on whether or not these therapies were effective. However, now that we have raised the issue of safety, we will discuss the risks associated with these treatments in the remainder of this chapter. For both these therapies, the primary issues are an assessment of the risk, determining whether or not the benefit outweighs the risk, and comparing the risk/benefit ratio with the risk/benefit associated with conventional medicine.
In the case of acupuncture, studies have shown that treatments can result in minor pain, bleeding or bruising, but these adverse reactions are only minor: they occur in roughly 10 per cent of patients and are transient. Slightly more serious side-effects include fainting, dizziness, nausea and vomiting, but again these events are rare and are usually associated with anxious patients who may have a fear of needles. Although most patients may accept such risks as an unsurprising consequence of being pierced with needles, there are two very serious adverse effects that patients should consider in advance of visiting an acupuncturist.
The first of these is infection. This is a concern because there have been several documented cases of patients contracting diseases such as hepatitis. For example, the journal Hepatology documented how 35 out of 366 patients contracted hepatitis B from an acupuncture clinic in Rhode Island. A detailed study of this outbreak showed that patients who received fewer than 150 needle insertions during the course of their treatment ran a 9 per cent risk of contracting the disease, whilst those who received more than 450 needles ran a 33 per cent risk. The infection is caused by re-using needles that have not been properly sterilized, and part of the problem may be due to the Chinese tradition of storing needles in alcohol solutions, which is not sufficient to protect against the hepatitis virus.
The other serious risk to patients is the danger that needles might puncture and damage a major nerve or organ. For example, needling at the base of the skull can lead to brain damage, deep needling in the lower back can damage a kidney, and there are over sixty reported cases of punctured lungs, known as pneumothorax. Most worrying of all, there is a report of an acupuncturist inserting a needle in the chest of an Austrian female patient and penetrating her heart. Normally needling at this point is entirely safe because the sternum protects the heart, but one in twenty people have a hole in that bone. This abnormality cannot be felt or seen because it is covered by very strong ligaments, but an acupuncture needle will go right through these structures. In the case of the Austrian patient, it pierced the heart and killed her.
Although acupuncture carries some common and serious risks, it is important to stress that the common risks are not at all serious and the serious risks are not at all common. The sixty cases of pneumothorax reported in recent decades have to be appreciated in the context of the millions of acupuncture treatments given each year. Moreover, the serious risks can be minimized by visiting a medically trained acupuncturist who uses disposable needles.
On the other hand, it should be remembered that the evidence for the efficacy of acupuncture ranges from zero for a whole range of conditions to borderline for some types of pain relief and nausea. Hence, it would only be worth considering acupuncture for treating pain relief and nausea, and only then if you feel on balance that the supposed benefits are large enough to outweigh the small risks.
In Chapter 3 we discussed the efficacy (or rather the lack of efficacy) of homeopathy. The conclusion was that the benefits of homeopathy were purely placebo, which is not surprising bearing in mind that the final medicine often contains no active ingredient because of the extreme levels of dilution. One might assume, therefore, that homeopathy would at least be safe. Surely, if homeopathic remedies are devoid of any active ingredient then they must be harmless?
Unfortunately, homeopathy can have surprising and dangerous side-effects. These have nothing to do directly with any particular homeopathic remedy, but rather they are an indirect result of what happens when homeopaths replace doctors as sources of medical advice.
For example, many homeopaths have a negative attitude towards immunization, so parents who are in regular contact with a homeopath may be less likely to immunize their child. To evaluate the extent of this problem, Edzard Ernst and Katja Schmidt at Exeter University conducted a revealing survey among UK homeopaths. Having obtained e-mail addresses from online directories, they sent an e-mail to 168 homeopaths in which they effectively pretended to be a mother asking for advice about whether or not to vaccinate her one-year-old child against measles, mumps and rubella (MMR). This was in 2002 when the controversy over MMR was subsiding and the scientific evidence was clearly in favour of vaccination. Although 104 homeopaths replied, the ethics committee overseeing the research survey required that these homeopaths be informed of the real purpose behind the e-mail and be given the opportunity to withdraw their replies if they were unwilling to be involved in the survey. Sure enough, twenty-seven homeopaths took advantage of this opportunity. Of the remaining seventy-seven respondents, only two (or 3 per cent) advised the mother to immunize. Of course, the responses of the twenty-seven homeopaths who withdrew from the survey have never been made public or evaluated, but it seems reasonable to assume that their general attitude on average would have been even more negative. It is clear that the overwhelming majority of homeopaths will discourage immunization.
This anti-immunization stance is not unique to homeopaths, but it is also common among other alternative therapists. At the same time as surveying homeopaths, Ernst and Schmidt also emailed chiropractors with the same request for immunization advice. There were twenty-two responses, but six chiropractors withdrew when they realized their replies were part of an academic survey. Out of the remaining sixteen responses, only four (25 per cent) chiropractors advised immunization. Again, we can assume that those who withdrew from the survey would have had an even more negative attitude. And, again, it is clear that the vast majority of chiropractors will discourage immunization.
This negative response from chiropractors was in keeping with the openly hostile attitude that is expressed in much of their literature. Senior chiropractors have written statements such as 'smallpox vaccination was stopped in the US and UK because it was realized that the vaccinated suffered the worst effects of the disease' and 'the dangers of vaccination to the young child are profound ... in some cases, the vaccine acts non-specifically to increase a child's pre-existing chronic disease tendency'. Both these statements are misleading and  damaging. The truth is that immunization is arguably the single most important discovery in the history of medicine. Indeed, there is probably a substantial proportion of readers, possibly including you, who would not be alive today if it were not for the immunizations that we all received when we were children.
Thankfully these diseases are now rare in the developed world, but this means that it is easy to forget their potentially devastating impact - we no longer appreciate why we used to fear them. If, however, we look beyond the developed world then we can be reminded of the dangers of childhood diseases and the value of vaccination. For example, the Measles Initiative was launched in 2001 to vaccinate children and reduce deaths from measles around the world. In its first five years the programme has already reduced the annual number of deaths from measles in Africa by 91 per cent, from over 400,000 to 36,000.
The widespread anti-immunization stance among alternative therapists is just one of the ways in which they offer harmful advice to patients. Another example is that alternative therapists sometimes meddle with a patient's conventional drug-treatment programme, even though they are not qualified to advise about a patient's prescription. A 2004 survey of UK-based acupuncturists showed that 3 per cent of patients received advice about their prescriptions, some of whom suffered adverse consequences.
Perhaps the greatest danger in the way that alternative therapists behave is simply the promotion of their own treatments when patients should be in the care of a conventional doctor. There are numerous reports of patients with serious conditions (e.g. diabetes, cancer, AIDS) suffering harm after following irresponsible advice from alternative practitioners instead of following the advice of a doctor.
This danger is amplified by a particularly strange facet of many alternative therapies, a phenomenon known as the healing crisis. This means that an expected part of the healing process is that the therapy might cause symptoms to deteriorate before they improve - this is supposedly due to the body fighting back or toxins being expelled. In one case, a patient being treated for pancreatitis (a life-threatening condition) was given a homeopathic remedy with a label advising that abdominal pain was part of the healing crisis, otherwise known as a homeopathic aggravation. So, just when the pancreatitis might be worsening and the patient ought to be seeking urgent medical attention, the homeopathic advice would be that the patient should relax because everything is progressing as expected.
In 2006, Simon Singh, one of the authors of this book, attempted to highlight the extent to which homeopaths give bad advice by finding out what they would offer to a young traveller seeking protection against malaria. Working with Alice Tuff and the charity Sense About Science, Singh developed a storyline in which Tuff would be making a ten-week overland trip through West Africa, where there is a high prevalence of the most dangerous strain of malaria, which can result in death within three days. The idea was that Tuff, a young graduate, would explain to homeopaths that she had previously suffered side-effects from conventional malaria tablets and wondered if there was a homeopathic alternative.
Before approaching homeopaths, however, Tuff visited a conventional travel clinic with exactly the same storyline, which resulted in a lengthy consultation. The health expert explained that side-effects were not unusual for malaria tablets, but that there was a range of options, so a different type of tablet might be advisable. These tablets could then be taken in the week prior to departure to check that they had no unpleasant side-effects. At the same time, the health expert asked detailed questions about Tuff's medical history and offered extensive advice, such as how to prevent insect bites.
Tuff found a variety of homeopaths by searching on the internet, just as any young student might do. She then visited or phoned ten of them, mainly based in and around London. Some of these homeopaths ran their own clinics, some were based at homeopathic pharmacies and one was based in a major mainstream pharmacy. In each case, Tuff secretly recorded the conversations in order to document the consultation.
The results were shocking. Seven out of the ten homeopaths failed to ask about the patient's medical background and also failed to offer any general advice about bite prevention. Worse still, ten out of ten homeopaths were willing to advise homeopathic protection against malaria instead of conventional treatment, which would have put our pretend traveller's life at risk. The homeopathic remedies differed between homeopaths. Some offered Malaria nosode (based on rotting vegetation), while others recommended China officinalis (based on quinine) or Natrum muriaticum (based on salt). In every case, the remedies were so diluted than none of them contained any active ingredient and all were equally useless.
The homeopaths offered anecdotes to show that homeopathy is effective. According to one practitioner, 'Once somebody told me she went to Africa to work and she said the people who took malaria tablets got malaria, although it was probably a different subversive type not the full blown, but the people who took homeopathics didn't. They didn't get ill at all.' She also advised that homeopathy could protect against yellow fever, dysentery and typhoid. Another homeopath tried to explain the mechanism behind the remedies: 'The remedies should lower your susceptibility; because what they do is they make it so your energy - your living energy - doesn't have a kind of malaria-shaped hole in it. The malarial mosquitoes won't come along and fill that in. The remedies sort it out.'
A few days later the BBC programme Newsnight conducted undercover filming at some of the same homeopathic clinics and found exactly the same empty remedies being offered to protect against malaria. It was in the run-up to the summer holiday season, so this became part of a campaign to warn travellers against the very real dangers of relying on homeopathy to protect against tropical diseases. One case reported in the British Medical Journal described how a woman had relied on homeopathy during a trip to Togo in West Africa, which resulted in a serious bout of malaria. This meant she had to endure two months of intensive care for multiple organ system failure.
The main point of the investigation into the homeopathic treatment of malaria was to demonstrate without doubt that even the most benign alternative medicine can become dangerous if the therapist who administers it advises a patient not to follow an effective conventional medical treatment.
It is likely that some of the alternative therapists who sell useless remedies for dangerous conditions are fully aware of what they are doing and are happy to profit from it. Before ending this chapter. however, it is important to stress that the majority of alternative therapists are acting with the best of intentions. These misguided therapists are simply deluding themselves, as well as their patients.
One of the most poignant examples of a well-intentioned homeopath is the case of an English homeopath working in Devon, whose identity cannot be revealed. In 2003, she noticed a brown spot on her own arm, which was growing in size and changing in colour. At the time, she was in regular contact with doctors as she was taking part in a study organized by Professor Ernst, which was designed to see if homeopaths could treat asthma. Rather than discussing her lesion with the doctors, however, she decided to treat it herself using her own homeopathic remedies.
She had such faith in her remedies that she treated the spot for several months and continued to keep it a secret from the doctors. Unfortunately, the spot turned out to be a malignant melanoma. As each month passed, the chance for early treatment of this aggressive form of cancer steadily disappeared. While she was still in the middle of treating asthma patients, the homeopath died. Had she sought conventional treatment at an early stage, then there might have been a 90 per cent chance that she would have survived for five or more years. By relying on homeopathy, she had condemned herself to an inevitably early death.